The Project Gutenberg eBook of Arsène Lupin versus Herlock Sholmes, by Maurice LeBlanc

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Arsène Lupin versus Herlock Sholmes

Author: Maurice LeBlanc

Translator: George Morehead

Release Date: July 11, 2012 [eBook #40203]
[Most recently updated: August 18, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Sr Bianca Tempt & Marc D’Hooghe

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARSÈNE LUPIN VS HERLOCK SHOLMES ***




The Extraordinary Adventures of Arsène Lupin




ARSÈNE LUPIN

VERSUS HERLOCK SHOLMES

BY

MAURICE LEBLANC

Translated from the French

By GEORGE MOREHEAD

M.A. DONOHUE & CO.

CHICAGO

1910


Contents

 CHAPTER I. Lottery Ticket No. 514
 CHAPTER II. The Blue Diamond
 CHAPTER III. Herlock Sholmes Opens Hostilities
 CHAPTER IV. Light in the Darkness
 CHAPTER V. An Abduction
 CHAPTER VI. Second Arrest of Arsène Lupin
 CHAPTER VII. The Jewish Lamp
 CHAPTER VIII. The Shipwreck




CHAPTER I.
LOTTERY TICKET NO. 514.


On the eighth day of last December, Mon. Gerbois, professor of
mathematics at the College of Versailles, while rummaging in an old
curiosity-shop, unearthed a small mahogany writing-desk which pleased
him very much on account of the multiplicity of its drawers.

“Just the thing for Suzanne’s birthday present,” thought he. And as he
always tried to furnish some simple pleasures for his daughter,
consistent with his modest income, he enquired the price, and, after
some keen bargaining, purchased it for sixty-five francs. As he was
giving his address to the shopkeeper, a young man, dressed with
elegance and taste, who had been exploring the stock of antiques,
caught sight of the writing-desk, and immediately enquired its price.

“It is sold,” replied the shopkeeper.

“Ah! to this gentleman, I presume?”

Monsieur Gerbois bowed, and left the store, quite proud to be the
possessor of an article which had attracted the attention of a
gentleman of quality. But he had not taken a dozen steps in the street,
when he was overtaken by the young man who, hat in hand and in a tone
of perfect courtesy, thus addressed him:

“I beg your pardon, monsieur; I am going to ask you a question that you
may deem impertinent. It is this: Did you have any special object in
view when you bought that writing-desk?”

“No, I came across it by chance and it struck my fancy.”

“But you do not care for it particularly?”

“Oh! I shall keep it—that is all.”

“Because it is an antique, perhaps?”

“No; because it is convenient,” declared Mon. Gerbois.

“In that case, you would consent to exchange it for another desk that
would be quite as convenient and in better condition?”

“Oh! this one is in good condition, and I see no object in making an
exchange.”

“But——”

Mon. Gerbois is a man of irritable disposition and hasty temper. So he
replied, testily:

“I beg of you, monsieur, do not insist.”

But the young man firmly held his ground.

“I don’t know how much you paid for it, monsieur, but I offer you
double.”

“No.”

“Three times the amount.”

“Oh! that will do,” exclaimed the professor, impatiently; “I don’t wish
to sell it.”

The young man stared at him for a moment in a manner that Mon. Gerbois
would not readily forget, then turned and walked rapidly away.

An hour later, the desk was delivered at the professor’s house on the
Viroflay road. He called his daughter, and said:

“Here is something for you, Suzanne, provided you like it.”

Suzanne was a pretty girl, with a gay and affectionate nature. She
threw her arms around her father’s neck and kissed him rapturously. To
her, the desk had all the semblance of a royal gift. That evening,
assisted by Hortense, the servant, she placed the desk in her room;
then she dusted it, cleaned the drawers and pigeon-holes, and carefully
arranged within it her papers, writing material, correspondence, a
collection of post-cards, and some souvenirs of her cousin Philippe
that she kept in secret.

Next morning, at half past seven, Mon. Gerbois went to the college. At
ten o’clock, in pursuance of her usual custom, Suzanne went to meet
him, and it was a great pleasure for him to see her slender figure and
childish smile waiting for him at the college gate. They returned home
together.

“And your writing desk—how is it this morning?”

“Marvellous! Hortense and I have polished the brass mountings until
they look like gold.”

“So you are pleased with it?”

“Pleased with it! Why, I don’t see how I managed to get on without it
for such a long time.”

As they were walking up the pathway to the house, Mon. Gerbois said:

“Shall we go and take a look at it before breakfast?”

“Oh! yes, that’s a splendid idea!”

She ascended the stairs ahead of her father, but, on arriving at the
door of her room, she uttered a cry of surprise and dismay.

“What’s the matter?” stammered Mon. Gerbois.

“The writing-desk is gone!”


When the police were called in, they were astonished at the admirable
simplicity of the means employed by the thief. During Suzanne’s
absence, the servant had gone to market, and while the house was thus
left unguarded, a drayman, wearing a badge—some of the neighbors saw
it—stopped his cart in front of the house and rang twice. Not knowing
that Hortense was absent, the neighbors were not suspicious;
consequently, the man carried on his work in peace and tranquility.

Apart from the desk, not a thing in the house had been disturbed. Even
Suzanne’s purse, which she had left upon the writing-desk, was found
upon an adjacent table with its contents untouched. It was obvious that
the thief had come with a set purpose, which rendered the crime even
more mysterious; because, why did he assume so great a risk for such a
trifling object?

The only clue the professor could furnish was the strange incident of
the preceding evening. He declared:

“The young man was greatly provoked at my refusal, and I had an idea
that he threatened me as he went away.”

But the clue was a vague one. The shopkeeper could not throw any light
on the affair. He did not know either of the gentlemen. As to the desk
itself, he had purchased it for forty francs at an executor’s sale at
Chevreuse, and believed he had resold it at its fair value. The police
investigation disclosed nothing more.

But Mon. Gerbois entertained the idea that he had suffered an enormous
loss. There must have been a fortune concealed in a secret drawer, and
that was the reason the young man had resorted to crime.

“My poor father, what would we have done with that fortune?” asked
Suzanne.

“My child! with such a fortune, you could make a most advantageous
marriage.”

Suzanne sighed bitterly. Her aspirations soared no higher than her
cousin Philippe, who was indeed a most deplorable object. And life, in
the little house at Versailles, was not so happy and contented as of
yore.

Two months passed away. Then came a succession of startling events, a
strange blending of good luck and dire misfortune!

On the first day of February, at half-past five, Mon. Gerbois entered
the house, carrying an evening paper, took a seat, put on his
spectacles, and commenced to read. As politics did not interest him, he
turned to the inside of the paper. Immediately his attention was
attracted by an article entitled:

“Third Drawing of the Press Association Lottery.

“No. 514, series 23, draws a million.”

The newspaper slipped from his fingers. The walls swam before his eyes,
and his heart ceased to beat. He held No. 514, series 23. He had
purchased it from a friend, to oblige him, without any thought of
success, and behold, it was the lucky number!

Quickly, he took out his memorandum-book. Yes, he was quite right. The
No. 514, series 23, was written there, on the inside of the cover. But
the ticket?

He rushed to his desk to find the envelope-box in which he had placed
the precious ticket; but the box was not there, and it suddenly
occurred to him that it had not been there for several weeks. He heard
footsteps on the gravel walk leading from the street.

He called:

“Suzanne! Suzanne!”

She was returning from a walk. She entered hastily. He stammered, in a
choking voice:

“Suzanne ... the box ... the box of envelopes?”

“What box?”

“The one I bought at the Louvre ... one Saturday ... it was at the end
of that table.”

“Don’t you remember, father, we put all those things away together.”

“When?”

“The evening ... you know ... the same evening....”

“But where?... Tell me, quick!... Where?”

“Where? Why, in the writing-desk.”

“In the writing-desk that was stolen?”

“Yes.”

“Oh, mon Dieu!... In the stolen desk!”

He uttered the last sentence in a low voice, in a sort of stupor. Then
he seized her hand, and in a still lower voice, he said:

“It contained a million, my child.”

“Ah! father, why didn’t you tell me?” she murmured, naively.

“A million!” he repeated. “It contained the ticket that drew the grand
prize in the Press Lottery.”

The colossal proportions of the disaster overwhelmed them, and for a
long time they maintained a silence that they feared to break. At last,
Suzanne said:

“But, father, they will pay you just the same.”

“How? On what proof?”

“Must you have proof?”

“Of course.”

“And you haven’t any?”

“It was in the box.”

“In the box that has disappeared.”

“Yes; and now the thief will get the money.”

“Oh! that would be terrible, father. You must prevent it.”

For a moment he was silent; then, in an outburst of energy, he leaped
up, stamped on the floor, and exclaimed:

“No, no, he shall not have that million; he shall not have it! Why
should he have it? Ah! clever as he is, he can do nothing. If he goes
to claim the money, they will arrest him. Ah! now, we will see, my fine
fellow!”

“What will you do, father?”

“Defend our just rights, whatever happens! And we will succeed. The
million francs belong to me, and I intend to have them.”

A few minutes later, he sent this telegram:

“Governor Crédit Foncier
“rue Capucines, Paris.
    “Am holder of No. 514, series 23. Oppose by all legal means any
    other claimant.


“GERBOIS.”


Almost at the same moment, the Crédit Foncier received the following
telegram:

“No. 514, series 23, is in my possession.


“ARSÈNE LUPIN.”



Every time I undertake to relate one of the many extraordinary
adventures that mark the life of Arsène Lupin, I experience a feeling
of embarrassment, as it seems to me that the most commonplace of those
adventures is already well known to my readers. In fact, there is not a
movement of our “national thief,” as he has been so aptly described,
that has not been given the widest publicity, not an exploit that has
not been studied in all its phases, not an action that has not been
discussed with that particularity usually reserved for the recital of
heroic deeds.

For instance, who does not know the strange history of “The Blonde
Lady,” with those curious episodes which were proclaimed by the
newspapers with heavy black headlines, as follows: “Lottery Ticket No.
514!” ... “The Crime on the Avenue Henri-Martin!” ... “The Blue
Diamond!” ... The interest created by the intervention of the
celebrated English detective, Herlock Sholmes! The excitement aroused
by the various vicissitudes which marked the struggle between those
famous artists! And what a commotion on the boulevards, the day on
which the newsboys announced: “Arrest of Arsène Lupin!”

My excuse for repeating these stories at this time is the fact that I
produce the key to the enigma. Those adventures have always been
enveloped in a certain degree of obscurity, which I now remove. I
reproduce old newspaper articles, I relate old-time interviews, I
present ancient letters; but I have arranged and classified all that
material and reduced it to the exact truth. My collaborators in this
work have been Arsène Lupin himself, and also the ineffable Wilson, the
friend and confidant of Herlock Sholmes.

Every one will recall the tremendous burst of laughter which greeted
the publication of those two telegrams. The name “Arsène Lupin” was in
itself a stimulus to curiosity, a promise of amusement for the gallery.
And, in this case, the gallery means the entire world.

An investigation was immediately commenced by the Crédit Foncier, which
established these facts: That ticket No. 514, series 23, had been sold
by the Versailles branch office of the Lottery to an artillery officer
named Bessy, who was afterward killed by a fall from his horse. Some
time before his death, he informed some of his comrades that he had
transferred his ticket to a friend.

“And I am that friend,” affirmed Mon. Gerbois.

“Prove it,” replied the governor of the Crédit Foncier.

“Of course I can prove it. Twenty people can tell you that I was an
intimate friend of Monsieur Bessy, and that we frequently met at the
Café de la Place-d’Armes. It was there, one day, I purchased the ticket
from him for twenty francs—simply as an accommodation to him.”

“Have you any witnesses to that transaction?”

“No.”

“Well, how do you expect to prove it?”

“By a letter he wrote to me.”

“What letter?”

“A letter that was pinned to the ticket.”

“Produce it.”

“It was stolen at the same time as the ticket.”

“Well, you must find it.”

It was soon learned that Arsène Lupin had the letter. A short paragraph
appeared in the _Echo de France_—which has the honor to be his official
organ, and of which, it is said, he is one of the principal
shareholders—the paragraph announced that Arsène Lupin had placed in
the hands of Monsieur Detinan, his advocate and legal adviser, the
letter that Monsieur Bessy had written to him—to him personally.

This announcement provoked an outburst of laughter. Arsène Lupin had
engaged a lawyer! Arsène Lupin, conforming to the rules and customs of
modern society, had appointed a legal representative in the person of a
well-known member of the Parisian bar!

Mon. Detinan had never enjoyed the pleasure of meeting Arsène Lupin—a
fact he deeply regretted—but he had actually been retained by that
mysterious gentleman and felt greatly honored by the choice. He was
prepared to defend the interests of his client to the best of his
ability. He was pleased, even proud, to exhibit the letter of Mon.
Bessy, but, although it proved the transfer of the ticket, it did not
mention the name of the purchaser. It was simply addressed to “My Dear
Friend.”

“My Dear Friend! that is I,” added Arsène Lupin, in a note attached to
Mon. Bessy’s letter. “And the best proof of that fact is that I hold
the letter.”

The swarm of reporters immediately rushed to see Mon. Gerbois, who
could only repeat:

“My Dear Friend! that is I.... Arsène Lupin stole the letter with the
lottery ticket.”

“Let him prove it!” retorted Lupin to the reporters.

“He must have done it, because he stole the writing-desk!” exclaimed
Mon. Gerbois before the same reporters.

“Let him prove it!” replied Lupin.

Such was the entertaining comedy enacted by the two claimants of ticket
No. 514; and the calm demeanor of Arsène Lupin contrasted strangely
with the nervous perturbation of poor Mon. Gerbois. The newspapers were
filled with the lamentations of that unhappy man. He announced his
misfortune with pathetic candor.

“Understand, gentlemen, it was Suzanne’s dowry that the rascal stole!
Personally, I don’t care a straw for it,... but for Suzanne! Just think
of it, a whole million! Ten times one hundred thousand francs! Ah! I
knew very well that the desk contained a treasure!”

It was in vain to tell him that his adversary, when stealing the desk,
was unaware that the lottery ticket was in it, and that, in any event,
he could not foresee that the ticket would draw the grand prize. He
would reply;

“Nonsense! of course, he knew it ... else why would he take the trouble
to steal a poor, miserable desk?”

“For some unknown reason; but certainly not for a small scrap of paper
which was then worth only twenty francs.”

“A million francs! He knew it;... he knows everything! Ah! you do not
know him—the scoundrel!... He hasn’t robbed you of a million francs!”

The controversy would have lasted for a much longer time, but, on the
twelfth day, Mon. Gerbois received from Arsène Lupin a letter, marked
“confidential,” which read as follows:

    “Monsieur, the gallery is being amused at our expense. Do you not
    think it is time for us to be serious? The situation is this: I
    possess a ticket to which I have no legal right, and you have the
    legal right to a ticket you do not possess. Neither of us can do
    anything. You will not relinquish your rights to me; I will not
    deliver the ticket to you. Now, what is to be done?
    “I see only one way out of the difficulty: Let us divide the
    spoils. A half-million for you; a half-million for me. Is not that
    a fair division? In my opinion, it is an equitable solution, and an
    immediate one. I will give you three days’ time to consider the
    proposition. On Thursday morning I shall expect to read in the
    personal column of the _Echo de France_ a discreet message
    addressed to _M. Ars. Lup_, expressing in veiled terms your consent
    to my offer. By so doing you will recover immediate possession of
    the ticket; then you can collect the money and send me half a
    million in a manner that I will describe to you later.
    “In case of your refusal, I shall resort to other measures to
    accomplish the same result. But, apart from the very serious
    annoyances that such obstinacy on your part will cause you, it will
    cost you twenty-five thousand francs for supplementary expenses.
    “Believe me, monsieur, I remain your devoted servant,


ARSÈNE LUPIN.”


In a fit of exasperation Mon. Gerbois committed the grave mistake of
showing that letter and allowing a copy of it to be taken. His
indignation overcame his discretion.

“Nothing! He shall have nothing!” he exclaimed, before a crowd of
reporters. “To divide my property with him? Never! Let him tear up the
ticket if he wishes!”

“Yet five hundred thousand francs is better than nothing.”

“That is not the question. It is a question of my just right, and that
right I will establish before the courts.”

“What! attack Arsène Lupin? That would be amusing.”

“No; but the Crédit Foncier. They must pay me the million francs.”

“Without producing the ticket, or, at least, without proving that you
bought it?”

“That proof exists, since Arsène Lupin admits that he stole the
writing-desk.”

“But would the word of Arsène Lupin carry any weight with the court?”

“No matter; I will fight it out.”

The gallery shouted with glee; and wagers were freely made upon the
result with the odds in favor of Lupin. On the following Thursday the
personal column in the _Echo de France_ was eagerly perused by the
expectant public, but it contained nothing addressed to _M. Ars. Lup_.
Mon. Gerbois had not replied to Arsène Lupin’s letter. That was the
declaration of war.

That evening the newspapers announced the abduction of Mlle. Suzanne
Gerbois.


The most entertaining feature in what might be called the Arsène Lupin
dramas is the comic attitude displayed by the Parisian police. Arsène
Lupin talks, plans, writes, commands, threatens and executes as if the
police did not exist. They never figure in his calculations.

And yet the police do their utmost. But what can they do against such a
foe—a foe that scorns and ignores them?

Suzanne had left the house at twenty minutes to ten; such was the
testimony of the servant. On leaving the college, at five minutes past
ten, her father did not find her at the place she was accustomed to
wait for him. Consequently, whatever had happened must have occurred
during the course of Suzanne’s walk from the house to the college. Two
neighbors had met her about three hundred yards from the house. A lady
had seen, on the avenue, a young girl corresponding to Suzanne’s
description. No one else had seen her.

Inquiries were made in all directions; the employees of the railways
and street-car lines were questioned, but none of them had seen
anything of the missing girl. However, at Ville-d’Avray, they found a
shopkeeper who had furnished gasoline to an automobile that had come
from Paris on the day of the abduction. It was occupied by a blonde
woman—extremely blonde, said the witness. An hour later, the automobile
again passed through Ville-d’Avray on its way from Versailles to Paris.
The shopkeeper declared that the automobile now contained a second
woman who was heavily veiled. No doubt, it was Suzanne Gerbois.

The abduction must have taken place in broad daylight, on a frequented
street, in the very heart of the town. How? And at what spot? Not a cry
was heard; not a suspicious action had been seen. The shopkeeper
described the automobile as a royal-blue limousine of twenty-four
horse-power made by the firm of Peugeon & Co. Inquiries were then made
at the Grand-Garage, managed by Madame Bob-Walthour, who made a
specialty of abductions by automobile. It was learned that she had
rented a Peugeon limousine on that day to a blonde woman whom she had
never seen before nor since.

“Who was the chauffeur?”

“A young man named Ernest, whom I had engaged only the day before. He
came well recommended.”

“Is he here now?”

“No. He brought back the machine, but I haven’t seen him since,” said
Madame Bob-Walthour.

“Do you know where we can find him?”

“You might see the people who recommended him to me. Here are the
names.”

Upon inquiry, it was learned that none of these people knew the man
called Ernest. The recommendations were forged.

Such was the fate of every clue followed by the police. It ended
nowhere. The mystery remained unsolved.

Mon. Gerbois had not the strength or courage to wage such an unequal
battle. The disappearance of his daughter crushed him; he capitulated
to the enemy. A short announcement in the _Echo de France_ proclaimed
his unconditional surrender.

Two days later, Mon. Gerbois visited the office of the Crédit Foncier
and handed lottery ticket number 514, series 23, to the governor, who
exclaimed, with surprise:

“Ah! you have it! He has returned it to you!”

“It was mislaid. That was all,” replied Mon. Gerbois.

“But you pretended that it had been stolen.”

“At first, I thought it had ... but here it is.”

“We will require some evidence to establish your right to the ticket.”

“Will the letter of the purchaser, Monsieur Bessy, be sufficient!”

“Yes, that will do.”

“Here it is,” said Mon. Gerbois, producing the letter.

“Very well. Leave these papers with us. The rules of the lottery allow
us fifteen days’ time to investigate your claim. I will let you know
when to call for your money. I presume you desire, as much as I do,
that this affair should be closed without further publicity.”

“Quite so.”

Mon. Gerbois and the governor henceforth maintained a discreet silence.
But the secret was revealed in some way, for it was soon commonly known
that Arsène Lupin had returned the lottery ticket to Mon. Gerbois. The
public received the news with astonishment and admiration. Certainly,
he was a bold gamester who thus threw upon the table a trump card of
such importance as the precious ticket. But, it was true, he still
retained a trump card of equal importance. However, if the young girl
should escape? If the hostage held by Arsène Lupin should be rescued?

The police thought they had discovered the weak spot of the enemy, and
now redoubled their efforts. Arsène Lupin disarmed by his own act,
crushed by the wheels of his own machination, deprived of every sou of
the coveted million ... public interest now centered in the camp of his
adversary.

But it was necessary to find Suzanne. And they did not find her, nor
did she escape. Consequently, it must be admitted, Arsène Lupin had won
the first hand. But the game was not yet decided. The most difficult
point remained. Mlle. Gerbois is in his possession, and he will hold
her until he receives five hundred thousand francs. But how and where
will such an exchange be made? For that purpose, a meeting must be
arranged, and then what will prevent Mon. Gerbois from warning the
police and, in that way, effecting the rescue of his daughter and, at
the same time, keeping his money? The professor was interviewed, but he
was extremely reticent. His answer was:

“I have nothing to say.”

“And Mlle. Gerbois?”

“The search is being continued.”

“But Arsène Lupin has written to you?”

“No.”

“Do you swear to that?”

“No.”

“Then it is true. What are his instructions?”

“I have nothing to say.”

Then the interviewers attacked Mon. Detinan, and found him equally
discreet.

“Monsieur Lupin is my client, and I cannot discuss his affairs,” he
replied, with an affected air of gravity.

These mysteries served to irritate the gallery. Obviously, some secret
negotiations were in progress. Arsène Lupin had arranged and tightened
the meshes of his net, while the police maintained a close watch, day
and night, over Mon. Gerbois. And the three and only possible
dénouements—the arrest, the triumph, or the ridiculous and pitiful
abortion—were freely discussed; but the curiosity of the public was
only partially satisfied, and it was reserved for these pages to reveal
the exact truth of the affair.


On Monday, March 12th, Mon. Gerbois received a notice from the Crédit
Foncier. On Wednesday, he took the one o’clock train for Paris. At two
o’clock, a thousand bank-notes of one thousand francs each were
delivered to him. Whilst he was counting them, one by one, in a state
of nervous agitation—that money, which represented Suzanne’s ransom—a
carriage containing two men stopped at the curb a short distance from
the bank. One of the men had grey hair and an unusually shrewd
expression which formed a striking contrast to his shabby make-up. It
was Detective Ganimard, the relentless enemy of Arsène Lupin. Ganimard
said to his companion, Folenfant:

“In five minutes, we will see our clever friend Lupin. Is everything
ready?”

“Yes.”

“How many men have we?”

“Eight—two of them on bicycles.”

“Enough, but not too many. On no account, must Gerbois escape us; if he
does, it is all up. He will meet Lupin at the appointed place, give
half a million in exchange for the girl, and the game will be over.”

“But why doesn’t Gerbois work with us? That would be the better way,
and he could keep all the money himself.”

“Yes, but he is afraid that if he deceives the other, he will not get
his daughter.”

“What other?”

“Lupin.”

Ganimard pronounced the word in a solemn tone, somewhat timidly, as if
he were speaking of some supernatural creature whose claws he already
felt.

“It is very strange,” remarked Folenfant, judiciously, “that we are
obliged to protect this gentleman contrary to his own wishes.”

“Yes, but Lupin always turns the world upside down,” said Ganimard,
mournfully.

A moment later, Mon. Gerbois appeared, and started up the street. At
the end of the rue des Capucines, he turned into the boulevards,
walking slowly, and stopping frequently to gaze at the shop-windows.

“Much too calm, too self-possessed,” said Ganimard. “A man with a
million in his pocket would not have that air of tranquillity.”

“What is he doing?”

“Oh! nothing, evidently.... But I have a suspicion that it is
Lupin—yes, Lupin!”

At that moment, Mon. Gerbois stopped at a news-stand, purchased a
paper, unfolded it and commenced to read it as he walked slowly away. A
moment later, he gave a sudden bound into an automobile that was
standing at the curb. Apparently, the machine had been waiting for him,
as it started away rapidly, turned at the Madeleine and disappeared.

“Nom de nom!” cried Ganimard, “that’s one of his old tricks!”

Ganimard hastened after the automobile around the Madeleine. Then, he
burst into laughter. At the entrance to the Boulevard Malesherbes, the
automobile had stopped and Mon. Gerbois had alighted.

“Quick, Folenfant, the chauffeur! It may be the man Ernest.”

Folenfant interviewed the chauffeur. His name was Gaston; he was an
employee of the automobile cab company; ten minutes ago, a gentleman
had engaged him and told him to wait near the news-stand for another
gentleman.

“And the second man—what address did he give?” asked Folenfant.

“No address. ‘Boulevard Malesherbes ... avenue de Messine ... double
pourboire.’ That is all.”

But, during this time, Mon. Gerbois had leaped into the first passing
carriage.

“To the Concorde station, Metropolitan,” he said to the driver.

He left the underground at the Place du Palais-Royal, ran to another
carriage and ordered it to go to the Place de la Bourse. Then a second
journey by the underground to the Avenue de Villiers, followed by a
third carriage drive to number 25 rue Clapeyron.

Number 25 rue Clapeyron is separated from the Boulevard des Batignolles
by the house which occupies the angle formed by the two streets. He
ascended to the first floor and rang. A gentleman opened the door.

“Does Monsieur Detinan live here?”

“Yes, that is my name. Are you Monsieur Gerbois?”

“Yes.”

“I was expecting you. Step in.”

As Mon. Gerbois entered the lawyer’s office, the clock struck three. He
said:

“I am prompt to the minute. Is he here?”

“Not yet.”

Mon. Gerbois took a seat, wiped his forehead, looked at his watch as if
he did not know the time, and inquired, anxiously:

“Will he come?”

“Well, monsieur,” replied the lawyer, “that I do not know, but I am
quite as anxious and impatient as you are to find out. If he comes, he
will run a great risk, as this house has been closely watched for the
last two weeks. They distrust me.”

“They suspect me, too. I am not sure whether the detectives lost sight
of me or not on my way here.”

“But you were—”

“It wouldn’t be my fault,” cried the professor, quickly. “You cannot
reproach me. I promised to obey his orders, and I followed them to the
very letter. I drew the money at the time fixed by him, and I came here
in the manner directed by him. I have faithfully performed my part of
the agreement—let him do his!”

After a short silence, he asked, anxiously:

“He will bring my daughter, won’t he?”

“I expect so.”

“But ... you have seen him?”

“I? No, not yet. He made the appointment by letter, saying both of you
would be here, and asking me to dismiss my servants before three
o’clock and admit no one while you were here. If I would not consent to
that arrangement, I was to notify him by a few words in the _Echo de
France_. But I am only too happy to oblige Mon. Lupin, and so I
consented.”

“Ah! how will this end?” moaned Mon. Gerbois.

He took the bank-notes from his pocket, placed them on the table and
divided them into two equal parts. Then the two men sat there in
silence. From time to time, Mon. Gerbois would listen. Did someone
ring?... His nervousness increased every minute, and Monsieur Detinan
also displayed considerable anxiety. At last, the lawyer lost his
patience. He rose abruptly, and said:

“He will not come.... We shouldn’t expect it. It would be folly on his
part. He would run too great a risk.”

And Mon. Gerbois, despondent, his hands resting on the bank-notes,
stammered:

“Oh! Mon Dieu! I hope he will come. I would give the whole of that
money to see my daughter again.”

The door opened.

“Half of it will be sufficient, Monsieur Gerbois.”

These words were spoken by a well-dressed young man who now entered the
room and was immediately recognized by Mon. Gerbois as the person who
had wished to buy the desk from him at Versailles. He rushed toward
him.

“Where is my daughter—my Suzanne?”

Arsène Lupin carefully closed the door, and, while slowly removing his
gloves, said to the lawyer:

“My dear maître, I am indebted to you very much for your kindness in
consenting to defend my interests. I shall not forget it.”

Mon. Detinan murmured:

“But you did not ring. I did not hear the door—”

“Doors and bells are things that should work without being heard. I am
here, and that is the important point.”

“My daughter! Suzanne! Where is she!” repeated the professor.

“Mon Dieu, monsieur,” said Lupin, “what’s your hurry? Your daughter
will be here in a moment.”

Lupin walked to and fro for a minute, then, with the pompous air of an
orator, he said:

“Monsieur Gerbois, I congratulate you on the clever way in which you
made the journey to this place.”

Then, perceiving the two piles of bank-notes, he exclaimed:

“Ah! I see! the million is here. We will not lose any time. Permit me.”

“One moment,” said the lawyer, placing himself before the table. “Mlle.
Gerbois has not yet arrived.”

“Well?”

“Is not her presence indispensable?”

“I understand! I understand! Arsène Lupin inspires only a limited
confidence. He might pocket the half-million and not restore the
hostage. Ah! monsieur, people do not understand me. Because I have been
obliged, by force of circumstances, to commit certain actions a little
... out of the ordinary, my good faith is impugned ... I, who have
always observed the utmost scrupulosity and delicacy in business
affairs. Besides, my dear monsieur if you have any fear, open the
window and call. There are at least a dozen detectives in the street.”

“Do you think so?”

Arsène Lupin raised the curtain.

“I think that Monsieur Gerbois could not throw Ganimard off the
scent.... What did I tell you? There he is now.”

“Is it possible!” exclaimed the professor. “But I swear to you—”

“That you have not betrayed me?... I do not doubt you, but those
fellows are clever—sometimes. Ah! I can see Folenfant, and Greaume, and
Dieuzy—all good friends of mine!”

Mon. Detinan looked at Lupin in amazement. What assurance! He laughed
as merrily as if engaged in some childish sport, as if no danger
threatened him. This unconcern reassured the lawyer more than the
presence of the detectives. He left the table on which the bank-notes
were lying. Arsène Lupin picked up one pile of bills after the other,
took from each of them twenty-five bank-notes which he offered to Mon.
Detinan, saying:

“The reward of your services to Monsieur Gerbois and Arsène Lupin. You
well deserve it.”

“You owe me nothing,” replied the lawyer.

“What! After all the trouble we have caused you!”

“And all the pleasure you have given me!”

“That means, my dear monsieur, that you do not wish to accept anything
from Arsène Lupin. See what it is to have a bad reputation.”

He then offered the fifty thousand francs to Mon. Gerbois, saying:

“Monsieur, in memory of our pleasant interview, permit me to return you
this as a wedding-gift to Mlle. Gerbois.”

Mon. Gerbois took the money, but said:

“My daughter will not marry.”

“She will not marry if you refuse your consent; but she wishes to
marry.”

“What do you know about it?”

“I know that young girls often dream of such things unknown to their
parents. Fortunately, there are sometimes good genii like Arsène Lupin
who discover their little secrets in the drawers of their writing
desks.”

“Did you find anything else?” asked the lawyer. “I confess I am curious
to know why you took so much trouble to get possession of that desk.”

“On account of its historic interest, my friend. Although despite the
opinion of Monsieur Gerbois, the desk contained no treasure except the
lottery ticket—and that was unknown to me—I had been seeking it for a
long time. That writing-desk of yew and mahogany was discovered in the
little house in which Marie Walêwska once lived in Boulogne, and, on
one of the drawers there is this inscription: ‘_Dedicated to Napoleon
I, Emperor of the French, by his very faithful servant, Mancion_.’ And
above it, these words, engraved with the point of a knife: ‘To you,
Marie.’ Afterwards, Napoleon had a similar desk made for the Empress
Josephine; so that the secretary that was so much admired at the
Malmaison was only an imperfect copy of the one that will henceforth
form part of my collection.”

“Ah! if I had known, when in the shop, I would gladly have given it up
to you,” said the professor.

Arsène Lupin smiled, as he replied:

“And you would have had the advantage of keeping for your own use
lottery ticket number 514.”

“And you would not have found it necessary to abduct my daughter.”

“Abduct your daughter?”

“Yes.”

“My dear monsieur, you are mistaken. Mlle. Gerbois was not abducted.”

“No?”

“Certainly not. Abduction means force or violence. And I assure you
that she served as hostage of her own free will.”

“Of her own free will!” repeated Mon. Gerbois, in amazement.

“In fact, she almost asked to be taken. Why, do you suppose that an
intelligent young girl like Mlle. Gerbois, and who, moreover, nourishes
an unacknowledged passion, would hesitate to do what was necessary to
secure her dowry. Ah! I swear to you it was not difficult to make her
understand that it was the only way to overcome your obstinacy.”

Mon. Detinan was greatly amused. He replied to Lupin:

“But I should think it was more difficult to get her to listen to you.
How did you approach her?”

“Oh! I didn’t approach her myself. I have not the honor of her
acquaintance. A friend of mine, a lady, carried on the negotiations.”

“The blonde woman in the automobile, no doubt.”

“Precisely. All arrangements were made at the first interview near the
college. Since then, Mlle. Gerbois and her new friend have been
travelling in Belgium and Holland in a manner that should prove most
pleasing and instructive to a young girl. She will tell you all about
it herself—”

The bell of the vestibule door rang, three rings in quick succession,
followed by two isolated rings.

“It is she,” said Lupin. “Monsieur Detinan, if you will be so kind—”

The lawyer hastened to the door.

Two young women entered. One of them threw herself into the arms of
Mon. Gerbois. The other approached Lupin. The latter was a tall woman
of a good figure, very pale complexion, and with blond hair, parted
over her forehead in undulating waves, that glistened and shone like
the setting sun. She was dressed in black, with no display of jewelled
ornaments; but, on the contrary, her appearance indicated good taste
and refined elegance. Arsène Lupin spoke a few words to her; then,
bowing to Mlle. Gerbois, he said:

“I owe you an apology, mademoiselle, for all your troubles, but I hope
you have not been too unhappy—”

“Unhappy! Why, I should have been very happy, indeed, if it hadn’t been
for leaving my poor father.”

“Then all is for the best. Kiss him again, and take advantage of the
opportunity—it is an excellent one—to speak to him about your cousin.”

“My cousin! What do you mean? I don’t understand.”

“Of course, you understand. Your cousin Philippe. The young man whose
letters you kept so carefully.”

Suzanne blushed; but, following Lupin’s advice, she again threw herself
into her father’s arms. Lupin gazed upon them with a tender look.

“Ah! Such is my reward for a virtuous act! What a touching picture! A
happy father and a happy daughter! And to know that their joy is your
work, Lupin! Hereafter these people will bless you, and reverently
transmit your name unto their descendants, even unto the fourth
generation. What a glorious reward, Lupin, for one act of kindness!”

He walked to the window.

“Is dear old Ganimard still waiting?... He would like very much to be
present at this charming domestic scene!... Ah! he is not there.... Nor
any of the others.... I don’t see anyone. The deuce! The situation is
becoming serious. I dare say they are already under the porte-cochere
... talking to the concierge, perhaps ... or, even, ascending the
stairs!”

Mon. Gerbois made a sudden movement. Now, that his daughter had been
restored to him, he saw the situation in a different light. To him, the
arrest of his adversary meant half-a-million francs. Instinctively, he
made a step forward. As if by chance, Lupin stood in his way.

“Where are you going, Monsieur Gerbois? To defend me against them! That
is very kind of you, but I assure you it is not necessary. They are
more worried than I.”

Then he continued to speak, with calm deliberation:

“But, really, what do they know? That you are here, and, perhaps, that
Mlle. Gerbois is here, for they may have seen her arrive with an
unknown lady. But they do not imagine that I am here. How is it
possible that I could be in a house that they ransacked from cellar to
garret this morning? They suppose that the unknown lady was sent by me
to make the exchange, and they will be ready to arrest her when she
goes out—”

At that moment, the bell rang. With a brusque movement, Lupin seized
Mon. Gerbois, and said to him, in an imperious tone:

“Do not move! Remember your daughter, and be prudent—otherwise— As to
you, Monsieur Detinan, I have your promise.”

Mon. Gerbois was rooted to the spot. The lawyer did not stir. Without
the least sign of haste, Lupin picked up his hat and brushed the dust
from off it with his sleeve.

“My dear Monsieur Detinan, if I can ever be of service to you.... My
best wishes, Mademoiselle Suzanne, and my kind regards to Monsieur
Philippe.”

He drew a heavy gold watch from his pocket.

“Monsieur Gerbois, it is now forty-two minutes past three. At forty-six
minutes past three, I give you permission to leave this room. Not one
minute sooner than forty-six minutes past three.”

“But they will force an entrance,” suggested Mon. Detinan.

“You forget the law, my dear monsieur! Ganimard would never venture to
violate the privacy of a French citizen. But, pardon me, time flies,
and you are all slightly nervous.”

He placed his watch on the table, opened the door of the room and
addressing the blonde lady he said:

“Are you ready my dear?”

He drew back to let her pass, bowed respectfully to Mlle. Gerbois, and
went out, closing the door behind him. Then they heard him in the
vestibule, speaking, in a loud voice: “Good-day, Ganimard, how goes it?
Remember me to Madame Ganimard. One of these days, I shall invite her
to breakfast. Au revoir, Ganimard.”

The bell rang violently, followed by repeated rings, and voices on the
landing.

“Forty-five minutes,” muttered Mon. Gerbois.

After a few seconds, he left the room and stepped into the vestibule.
Arsène Lupin and the blonde lady had gone.

“Papa!... you mustn’t! Wait!” cried Suzanne.

“Wait! you are foolish!... No quarter for that rascal!... And the
half-million?”

He opened the outer door. Ganimard rushed in.

“That woman—where is she? And Lupin?”

“He was here ... he is here.”

Ganimard uttered a cry of triumph.

“We have him. The house is surrounded.”

“But the servant’s stairway?” suggested Mon. Detinan.

“It leads to the court,” said Ganimard. “There is only one exit—the
street-door. Ten men are guarding it.”

“But he didn’t come in by the street-door, and he will not go out that
way.”

“What way, then?” asked Ganimard. “Through the air?”

He drew aside a curtain and exposed a long corridor leading to the
kitchen. Ganimard ran along it and tried the door of the servants’
stairway. It was locked. From the window he called to one of his
assistants:

“Seen anyone?”

“No.”

“Then they are still in the house!” he exclaimed. “They are hiding in
one of the rooms! They cannot have escaped. Ah! Lupin, you fooled me
before, but, this time, I get my revenge.”


At seven o’clock in the evening, Mon. Dudonis, chief of the detective
service, astonished at not receiving any news, visited the rue
Clapeyron. He questioned the detectives who were guarding the house,
then ascended to Mon. Detinan’s apartment. The lawyer led him into his
room. There, Mon. Dudonis beheld a man, or rather two legs kicking in
the air, while the body to which they belonged was hidden in the depths
of the chimney.

“Ohé!... Ohé!” gasped a stifled voice. And a more distant voice, from
on high, replied:

“Ohé!... Ohé!”

Mon. Dudonis laughed, and exclaimed:

“Here! Ganimard, have you turned chimney-sweep?”

The detective crawled out of the chimney. With his blackened face, his
sooty clothes, and his feverish eyes, he was quite unrecognizable.

“I am looking for _him_,” he growled.

“Who?”

“Arsène Lupin ... and his friend.”

“Well, do you suppose they are hiding in the chimney?”

Ganimard arose, laid his sooty hand on the sleeve of his superior
officer’s coat, and exclaimed, angrily:

“Where do you think they are, chief? They must be somewhere! They are
flesh and blood like you and me, and can’t fade away like smoke.”

“No, but they have faded away just the same.”

“But how? How? The house is surrounded by our men—even on the roof.”

“What about the adjoining house?”

“There’s no communication with it.”

“And the apartments on the other floors?”

“I know all the tenants. They have not seen anyone.”

“Are you sure you know all of them?”

“Yes. The concierge answers for them. Besides, as an extra precaution,
I have placed a man in each apartment. They can’t escape. If I don’t
get them to-night, I will get them to-morrow. I shall sleep here.”

He slept there that night and the two following nights. Three days and
nights passed away without the discovery of the irrepressible Lupin or
his female companion; more than that, Ganimard did not unearth the
slightest clue on which to base a theory to explain their escape. For
that reason, he adhered to his first opinion.

“There is no trace of their escape; therefore, they are here.”

It may be that, at the bottom of his heart, his conviction was less
firmly established, but he would not confess it. No, a thousand times,
no! A man and a woman could not vanish like the evil spirits in a fairy
tale. And, without losing his courage, he continued his searches, as if
he expected to find the fugitives concealed in some impenetrable
retreat, or embodied in the stone walls of the house.




CHAPTER II.
THE BLUE DIAMOND.


On the evening of March 27, at number 134 avenue Henri-Martin, in the
house that he had inherited from his brother six months before, the old
general Baron d’Hautrec, ambassador at Berlin under the second Empire,
was asleep in a comfortable armchair, while his secretary was reading
to him, and the Sister Auguste was warming his bed and preparing the
night-lamp. At eleven o’clock, the Sister, who was obliged to return to
the convent of her order at that hour, said to the secretary:

“Mademoiselle Antoinette, my work is finished; I am going.”

“Very well, Sister.”

“Do not forget that the cook is away, and that you are alone in the
house with the servant.”

“Have no fear for the Baron. I sleep in the adjoining room and always
leave the door open.”

The Sister left the house. A few moments later, Charles, the servant,
came to receive his orders. The Baron was now awake, and spoke for
himself.

“The usual orders, Charles: see that the electric bell rings in your
room, and, at the first alarm, run for the doctor. Now, Mademoiselle
Antoinette, how far did we get in our reading?”

“Is Monsieur not going to bed now?”

“No, no, I will go later. Besides, I don’t need anyone.”

Twenty minutes later, he was sleeping again, and Antoinette crept away
on tiptoe. At that moment, Charles was closing the shutters on the
lower floor. In the kitchen, he bolted the door leading to the garden,
and, in the vestibule, he not only locked the door but hooked the chain
as well. Then he ascended to his room on the third floor, went to bed,
and was soon asleep.

Probably an hour had passed, when he leaped from his bed in alarm. The
bell was ringing. It rang for some time, seven or eight seconds
perhaps, without intermission.

“Well?” muttered Charles, recovering his wits, “another of the Baron’s
whims.”

He dressed himself quickly, descended the stairs, stopped in front of
the door, and rapped, according to his custom. He received no reply. He
opened the door and entered.

“Ah! no light,” he murmured. “What is that for?”

Then, in a low voice, he called:

“Mademoiselle?”

No reply.

“Are you there, mademoiselle? What’s the matter? Is Monsieur le Baron
ill?”

No reply. Nothing but a profound silence that soon became depressing.
He took two steps forward; his foot struck a chair, and, having touched
it, he noticed that it was overturned. Then, with his hand, he
discovered other objects on the floor—a small table and a screen.
Anxiously, he approached the wall, felt for the electric button, and
turned on the light.

In the centre of the room, between the table and dressing-case, lay the
body of his master, the Baron d’Hautrec.

“What!... It can’t be possible!” he stammered.

He could not move. He stood there, with bulging eyes, gazing stupidly
at the terrible disorder, the overturned chairs, a large crystal
candelabra shattered in a thousand pieces, the clock lying on the
marble hearthstone, all evidence of a fearful and desperate struggle.
The handle of a stiletto glittered, not far from the corpse; the blade
was stained with blood. A handkerchief, marked with red spots, was
lying on the edge of the bed.

Charles recoiled with horror: the body lying at his feet extended
itself for a moment, then shrunk up again; two or three tremors, and
that was the end.

He stooped over the body. There was a clean-cut wound on the neck from
which the blood was flowing and then congealing in a black pool on the
carpet. The face retained an expression of extreme terror.

“Some one has killed him!” he muttered, “some one has killed him!”

Then he shuddered at the thought that there might be another dreadful
crime. Did not the baron’s secretary sleep in the adjoining room? Had
not the assassin killed her also? He opened the door; the room was
empty. He concluded that Antoinette had been abducted, or else she had
gone away before the crime. He returned to the baron’s chamber, his
glance falling on the secretary, he noticed that that article of
furniture remained intact. Then, he saw upon a table, beside a bunch of
keys and a pocketbook that the baron placed there every night, a
handful of golden louis. Charles seized the pocketbook, opened it, and
found some bank-notes. He counted them; there were thirteen notes of
one hundred francs each.

Instinctively, mechanically, he put the bank-notes in his pocket,
rushed down the stairs, drew the bolt, unhooked the chain, closed the
door behind him, and fled to the street.


Charles was an honest man. He had scarcely left the gate, when, cooled
by the night air and the rain, he came to a sudden halt. Now, he saw
his action in its true light, and it filled him with horror. He hailed
a passing cab, and said to the driver:

“Go to the police-office, and bring the commissary. Hurry! There has
been a murder in that house.”

The cab-driver whipped his horse. Charles wished to return to the
house, but found the gate locked. He had closed it himself when he came
out, and it could not be opened from the outside. On the other hand, it
was useless to ring, as there was no one in the house.

It was almost an hour before the arrival of the police. When they came,
Charles told his story and handed the bank-notes to the commissary. A
locksmith was summoned, and, after considerable difficulty, he
succeeded in forcing open the garden gate and the vestibule door. The
commissary of police entered the room first, but, immediately, turned
to Charles and said:

“You told me that the room was in the greatest disorder.”

Charles stood at the door, amazed, bewildered; all the furniture had
been restored to its accustomed place. The small table was standing
between the two windows, the chairs were upright, and the clock was on
the centre of the mantel. The debris of the candelabra had been
removed.

“Where is.... Monsieur le Baron?” stammered Charles.

“That’s so!” exclaimed the officer, “where is the victim?”

He approached the bed, and drew aside a large sheet, under which
reposed the Baron d’Hautrec, formerly French Ambassador at Berlin. Over
him, lay his military coat, adorned with the Cross of Honor. His
features were calm. His eyes were closed.

“Some one has been here,” said Charles.

“How did they get in?”

“I don’t know, but some one has been here during my absence. There was
a stiletto on the floor—there! And a handkerchief, stained with blood,
on the bed. They are not here now. They have been carried away. And
some one has put the room in order.”

“Who would do that?”

“The assassin.”

“But we found all the doors locked.”

“He must have remained in the house.”

“Then he must be here yet, as you were in front of the house all the
time.”

Charles reflected a moment, then said, slowly:

“Yes ... of course.... I didn’t go away from the gate.”

“Who was the last person you saw with the baron?”

“Mademoiselle Antoinette, his secretary.”

“What has become of her?”

“I don’t know. Her bed wasn’t occupied, so she must have gone out. I am
not surprised at that, as she is young and pretty.”

“But how could she leave the house?”

“By the door,” said Charles.

“But you had bolted and chained it.”

“Yes, but she must have left before that.”

“And the crime was committed after her departure?”

“Of course,” said the servant.

The house was searched from cellar to garret, but the assassin had
fled. How? And when? Was it he or an accomplice who had returned to the
scene of the crime and removed everything that might furnish a clue to
his identity? Such were the questions the police were called upon to
solve.

The coroner came at seven o’clock; and, at eight o’clock, Mon. Dudouis,
the head of the detective service, arrived on the scene. They were
followed by the Procureur of the Republic and the investigating
magistrate. In addition to these officials, the house was overrun with
policemen, detectives, newspaper reporters, photographers, and
relatives and acquaintances of the murdered man.

A thorough search was made; they studied out the position of the corpse
according to the information furnished by Charles; they questioned
Sister Auguste when she arrived; but they discovered nothing new.
Sister Auguste was astonished to learn of the disappearance of
Antoinette Bréhat. She had engaged the young girl twelve days before,
on excellent recommendations, and refused to believe that she would
neglect her duty by leaving the house during the night.

“But, you see, she hasn’t returned yet,” said the magistrate, “and we
are still confronted with the question: What has become of her?”

“I think she was abducted by the assassin,” said Charles.

The theory was plausible, and was borne out by certain facts. Mon.
Dudouis agreed with it. He said:

“Abducted? ma foi! that is not improbable.”

“Not only improbable,” said a voice, “but absolutely opposed to the
facts. There is not a particle of evidence to support such a theory.”

The voice was harsh, the accent sharp, and no one was surprised to
learn that the speaker was Ganimard. In no one else, would they
tolerate such a domineering tone.

“Ah! it is you, Ganimard!” exclaimed Mon. Dudouis. “I had not seen you
before.”

“I have been here since two o’clock.”

“So you are interested in some things outside of lottery ticket number
514, the affair of the rue Clapeyron, the blonde lady and Arsène
Lupin?”

“Ha-ha!” laughed the veteran detective. “I would not say that Lupin is
a stranger to the present case. But let us forget the affair of the
lottery ticket for a few moments, and try to unravel this new mystery.”


Ganimard is not one of those celebrated detectives whose methods will
create a school, or whose name will be immortalized in the criminal
annals of his country. He is devoid of those flashes of genius which
characterize the work of Dupin, Lecoq and Sherlock Holmes. Yet, it must
be admitted, he possesses superior qualities of observation, sagacity,
perseverance and even intuition. His merit lies in his absolute
independence. Nothing troubles or influences him, except, perhaps, a
sort of fascination that Arsène Lupin holds over him. However that may
be, there is no doubt that his position on that morning, in the house
of the late Baron d’Hautrec, was one of undoubted superiority, and his
collaboration in the case was appreciated and desired by the
investigating magistrate.

“In the first place,” said Ganimard, “I will ask Monsieur Charles to be
very particular on one point: He says that, on the occasion of his
first visit to the room, various articles of furniture were overturned
and strewn about the place; now, I ask him whether, on his second visit
to the room, he found all those articles restored to their accustomed
places—I mean, of course, correctly placed.”

“Yes, all in their proper places,” replied Charles.

“It is obvious, then, that the person who replaced them must have been
familiar with the location of those articles.”

The logic of this remark was apparent to his hearers. Ganimard
continued:

“One more question, Monsieur Charles. You were awakened by the ringing
of your bell. Now, who, do you think, rang it?”

“Monsieur le baron, of course.”

“When could he ring it?”

“After the struggle ... when he was dying.”

“Impossible; because you found him lying, unconscious, at a point more
than four metres from the bell-button.”

“Then he must have rung during the struggle.”

“Impossible,” declared Ganimard, “since the ringing, as you have said,
was continuous and uninterrupted, and lasted seven or eight seconds. Do
you think his antagonist would have permitted him to ring the bell in
that leisurely manner?”

“Well, then, it was before the attack.”

“Also, quite impossible, since you have told us that the lapse of time
between the ringing of the bell and your entrance to the room was not
more than three minutes. Therefore, if the baron rang before the
attack, we are forced to the conclusion that the struggle, the murder
and the flight of the assassin, all occurred within the short space of
three minutes. I repeat: that is impossible.”

“And yet,” said the magistrate, “some one rang. If it were not the
baron, who was it?”

“The murderer.”

“For what purpose?”

“I do not know. But the fact that he did ring proves that he knew that
the bell communicated with the servant’s room. Now, who would know
that, except an inmate of the house?”

Ganimard was drawing the meshes of his net closer and tighter. In a few
clear and logical sentences, he had unfolded and defined his theory of
the crime, so that it seemed quite natural when the magistrate said:

“As I understand it, Ganimard, you suspect the girl Antoinette Bréhat?”

“I do not suspect her; I accuse her.”

“You accuse her of being an accomplice?”

“I accuse her of having killed Baron d’Hautrec.”

“Nonsense! What proof have you?”

“The handful of hair I found in the right hand of the victim.”

He produced the hair; it was of a beautiful blond color, and glittered
like threads of gold. Charles looked at it, and said:

“That is Mademoiselle Antoinette’s hair. There can be no doubt of it.
And, then, there is another thing. I believe that the knife, which I
saw on my first visit to the room, belonged to her. She used it to cut
the leaves of books.”

A long, dreadful silence followed, as if the crime had acquired an
additional horror by reason of having been committed by a woman. At
last, the magistrate said:

“Let us assume, until we are better informed, that the baron was killed
by Antoinette Bréhat. We have yet to learn where she concealed herself
after the crime, how she managed to return after Charles left the
house, and how she made her escape after the arrival of the police.
Have you formed any opinion on those points Ganimard?”

“None.”

“Well, then, where do we stand?”

Ganimard was embarrassed. Finally, with a visible effort, he said:

“All I can say is that I find in this case the same method of procedure
as we found in the affair of the lottery ticket number 514; the same
phenomena, which might be termed the faculty of disappearing.
Antoinette Bréhat has appeared and disappeared in this house as
mysteriously as Arsène Lupin entered the house of Monsieur Detinan and
escaped therefrom in the company of the blonde lady.”

“Does that signify anything?”

“It does to me. I can see a probable connection between those two
strange incidents. Antoinette Bréhat was hired by Sister Auguste twelve
days ago, that is to say, on the day after the blonde Lady so cleverly
slipped through my fingers. In the second place, the hair of the blonde
Lady was exactly of the same brilliant golden hue as the hair found in
this case.”

“So that, in your opinion, Antoinette Bréhat—”

“Is the blonde Lady—precisely.”

“And that Lupin had a hand in both cases?”

“Yes, that is my opinion.”

This statement was greeted with an outburst of laughter. It came from
Mon. Dudouis.

“Lupin! always Lupin! Lupin is into everything; Lupin is everywhere!”

“Yes, Lupin is into everything of any consequence,” replied Ganimard,
vexed at the ridicule of his superior.

“Well, so far as I see,” observed Mon. Dudouis, “you have not
discovered any motive for this crime. The secretary was not broken
into, nor the pocketbook carried away. Even, a pile of gold was left
upon the table.”

“Yes, that is so,” exclaimed Ganimard, “but the famous diamond?”

“What diamond?”

“The blue diamond! The celebrated diamond which formed part of the
royal crown of France, and which was given by the Duke d’Aumale to
Leonide Lebrun, and, at the death of Leonide Lebrun, was purchased by
the Baron d’Hautrec as a souvenir of the charming comedienne that he
had loved so well. That is one of those things that an old Parisian,
like I, does not forget.”

“It is obvious that if the blue diamond is not found, the motive for
the crime is disclosed,” said the magistrate. “But where should we
search for it?”

“On the baron’s finger,” replied Charles. “He always wore the blue
diamond on his left hand.”

“I saw that hand, and there was only a plain gold ring on it,” said
Ganimard, as he approached the corpse.

“Look in the palm of the hand,” replied the servant.

Ganimard opened the stiffened hand. The bezel was turned inward, and,
in the centre of that bezel, the blue diamond shone with all its
glorious splendor.

“The deuce!” muttered Ganimard, absolutely amazed, “I don’t understand
it.”

“You will now apologize to Lupin for having suspected him, eh?” said
Mon. Dudouis, laughing.

Ganimard paused for a moment’s reflection, and then replied,
sententiously:

“It is only when I do not understand things that I suspect Arsène
Lupin.”

Such were the facts established by the police on the day after the
commission of that mysterious crime. Facts that were vague and
incoherent in themselves, and which were not explained by any
subsequent discoveries. The movements of Antoinette Bréhat remained as
inexplicable as those of the blonde Lady, and the police discovered no
trace of that mysterious creature with the golden hair who had killed
Baron d’Hautrec and had failed to take from his finger the famous
diamond that had once shone in the royal crown of France.


The heirs of the Baron d’Hautrec could not fail to benefit by such
notoriety. They established in the house an exhibition of the furniture
and other objects which were to be sold at the auction rooms of Drouot
& Co. Modern furniture of indifferent taste, various objects of no
artistic value ... but, in the centre of the room, in a case of purple
velvet, protected by a glass globe, and guarded by two officers, was
the famous blue diamond ring.

A large magnificent diamond of incomparable purity, and of that
indefinite blue which the clear water receives from an unclouded sky,
of that blue which can be detected in the whiteness of linen. Some
admired, some enthused ... and some looked with horror on the chamber
of the victim, on the spot where the corpse had lain, on the floor
divested of its blood-stained carpet, and especially the walls, the
unsurmountable walls over which the criminal must have passed. Some
assured themselves that the marble mantel did not move, others imagined
gaping holes, mouths of tunnels, secret connections with the sewers,
and the catacombs—

The sale of the blue diamond took place at the salesroom of Drouot &
Co. The place was crowded to suffocation, and the bidding was carried
to the verge of folly. The sale was attended by all those who usually
appear at similar events in Paris; those who buy, and those who make a
pretense of being able to buy; bankers, brokers, artists, women of all
classes, two cabinet ministers, an Italian tenor, an exiled king who,
in order to maintain his credit, bid, with much ostentation, and in a
loud voice, as high as one hundred thousand francs. One hundred
thousand francs! He could offer that sum without any danger of his bid
being accepted. The Italian tenor risked one hundred and fifty
thousand, and a member of the Comédie-Française bid one hundred and
seventy-five thousand francs.

When the bidding reached two hundred thousand francs, the smaller
competitors fell out of the race. At two hundred and fifty thousand,
only two bidders remained in the field: Herschmann, the well-known
capitalist, the king of gold mines; and the Countess de Crozon, the
wealthy American, whose collection of diamonds and precious stones is
famed throughout the world.

“Two hundred and sixty thousand ... two hundred and seventy thousand
... seventy-five ... eighty....” exclaimed the auctioneer, as he
glanced at the two competitors in succession. “Two hundred and eighty
thousand for madame.... Do I hear any more?”

“Three hundred thousand,” said Herschmann.

There was a short silence. The countess was standing, smiling, but pale
from excitement. She was leaning against the back of the chair in front
of her. She knew, and so did everyone present, that the issue of the
duel was certain; logically, inevitably, it must terminate to the
advantage of the capitalist, who had untold millions with which to
indulge his caprices. However, the countess made another bid:

“Three hundred and five thousand.”

Another silence. All eyes were now directed to the capitalist in the
expectation that he would raise the bidding. But Herschmann was not
paying any attention to the sale; his eyes were fixed on a sheet of
paper which he held in his right hand, while the other hand held a torn
envelope.

“Three hundred and five thousand,” repeated the auctioneer. “Once!...
Twice!... For the last time.... Do I hear any more?... Once!...
Twice!... Am I offered any more? Last chance!...”

Herschmann did not move.

“Third and last time!... Sold!” exclaimed the auctioneer, as his hammer
fell.

“Four hundred thousand,” cried Herschman, starting up, as if the sound
of the hammer had roused him from his stupor.

Too late; the auctioneer’s decision was irrevocable. Some of
Herschmann’s acquaintances pressed around him. What was the matter? Why
did he not speak sooner? He laughed, and said:

“Ma foi! I simply forgot—in a moment of abstraction.”

“That is strange.”

“You see, I just received a letter.”

“And that letter was sufficient—”

“To distract my attention? Yes, for a moment.”

Ganimard was there. He had come to witness the sale of the ring. He
stopped one of the attendants of the auction room, and said:

“Was it you who carried the letter to Monsieur Herschmann?”

“Yes.”

“Who gave it to you?”

“A lady.”

“Where is she?”

“Where is she?... She was sitting down there ... the lady who wore a
thick veil.”

“She has gone?”

“Yes, just this moment.”

Ganimard hastened to the door, and saw the lady descending the stairs.
He ran after her. A crush of people delayed him at the entrance. When
he reached the sidewalk, she had disappeared. He returned to the
auction room, accosted Herschmann, introduced himself, and enquired
about the letter. Herschmann handed it to him. It was carelessly
scribbled in pencil, in a handwriting unknown to the capitalist, and
contained these few words:

_“The blue diamond brings misfortune. Remember the Baron d’Hautrec.”_


The vicissitudes of the blue diamond were not yet at an end. Although
it had become well-known through the murder of the Baron d’Hautrec and
the incidents at the auction-rooms, it was six months later that it
attained even greater celebrity. During the following summer, the
Countess de Crozon was robbed of the famous jewel she had taken so much
trouble to acquire.

Let me recall that strange affair, of which the exciting and dramatic
incidents sent a thrill through all of us, and over which I am now
permitted to throw some light.

On the evening of August 10, the guests of the Count and Countess de
Crozon were assembled in the drawing-room of the magnificent château
which overlooks the Bay de Somme. To entertain her friends, the
countess seated herself at the piano to play for them, after first
placing her jewels on a small table near the piano, and, amongst them,
was the ring of the Baron d’Hautrec.

An hour later, the count and the majority of the guests retired,
including his two cousins and Madame de Réal, an intimate friend of the
countess. The latter remained in the drawing-room with Herr Bleichen,
the Austrian consul, and his wife.

They conversed for a time, and then the countess extinguished the large
lamp that stood on a table in the centre of the room. At the same
moment, Herr Bleichen extinguished the two piano lamps. There was a
momentary darkness; then the consul lighted a candle, and the three of
them retired to their rooms. But, as soon as she reached her apartment,
the countess remembered her jewels and sent her maid to get them. When
the maid returned with the jewels, she placed them on the mantel
without the countess looking at them. Next day, Madame de Crozon found
that one of her rings was missing; it was the blue diamond ring.

She informed her husband, and, after talking it over, they reached the
conclusion that the maid was above suspicion, and that the guilty party
must be Herr Bleichen.

The count notified the commissary of police at Amiens, who commenced an
investigation and, discreetly, exercised a strict surveillance over the
Austrian consul to prevent his disposing of the ring.

The château was surrounded by detectives day and night. Two weeks
passed without incident. Then Herr Bleichen announced his intended
departure. That day, a formal complaint was entered against him. The
police made an official examination of his luggage. In a small satchel,
the key to which was always carried by the consul himself, they found a
bottle of dentifrice, and in that bottle they found the ring.

Madame Bleichen fainted. Her husband was placed under arrest.

Everyone will remember the line of defense adopted by the accused man.
He declared that the ring must have been placed there by the Count de
Crozen as an act of revenge. He said:

“The count is brutal and makes his wife very unhappy. She consulted me,
and I advised her to get a divorce. The count heard of it in some way,
and, to be revenged on me, he took the ring and placed it in my
satchel.”

The count and countess persisted in pressing the charge. Between the
explanation which they gave and that of the consul, both equally
possible and equally probable, the public had to choose. No new fact
was discovered to turn the scale in either direction. A month of
gossip, conjectures and investigations failed to produce a single ray
of light.

Wearied of the excitement and notoriety, and incapable of securing the
evidence necessary to sustain their charge against the consul, the
count and countess at last sent to Paris for a detective competent to
unravel the tangled threads of this mysterious skein. This brought
Ganimard into the case.

For four days, the veteran detective searched the house from top to
bottom, examined every foot of the ground, had long conferences with
the maid, the chauffeur, the gardeners, the employees in the
neighboring post-offices, visited the rooms that had been occupied by
the various guests. Then, one morning, he disappeared without taking
leave of his host or hostess. But a week later, they received this
telegram:

“Please come to the Japanese Tea-room, rue Boissy d’Anglas, to-morrow,
Friday, evening at five o’clock. Ganimard.”


At five o’clock, Friday evening, their automobile stopped in front of
number nine rue Boissy-d’Anglas. The old detective was standing on the
sidewalk, waiting for them. Without a word, he conducted them to the
first floor of the Japanese Tea-room. In one of the rooms, they met two
men, whom Ganimard introduced in these words:

“Monsieur Gerbois, professor in the College of Versailles, from whom,
you will remember, Arsène Lupin stole half a million; Monsieur Léonce
d’Hautrec, nephew and sole legatee of the Baron d’Hautrec.”

A few minutes later, another man arrived. It was Mon. Dudouis, head of
the detective service, and he appeared to be in a particularly bad
temper. He bowed, and then said:

“What’s the trouble now, Ganimard? I received your telephone message
asking me to come here. Is it anything of consequence?”

“Yes, chief, it is a very important matter. Within an hour, the last
two cases to which I was assigned will have their dénouement here. It
seemed to me that your presence was indispensable.”

“And also the presence of Dieuzy and Folenfant, whom I noticed standing
near the door as I came in?”

“Yes, chief.”

“For what? Are you going to make an arrest, and you wish to do it with
a flourish? Come, Ganimard, I am anxious to hear about it.”

Ganimard hesitated a moment, then spoke with the obvious intention of
making an impression on his hearers:

“In the first place, I wish to state that Herr Bleichen had nothing to
do with the theft of the ring.”

“Oh! oh!” exclaimed Mon. Dudouis, “that is a bold statement and a very
serious one.”

“And is that all you have discovered?” asked the Count de Crozon.

“Not at all. On the second day after the theft, three of your guests
went on an automobile trip as far as Crécy. Two of them visited the
famous battlefield; and, while they were there, the third party paid a
hasty visit to the post-office, and mailed a small box, tied and sealed
according to the regulations, and declared its value to be one hundred
francs.”

“I see nothing strange in that,” said the count.

“Perhaps you will see something strange in it when I tell you that this
person, in place of giving her true name, sent the box under the name
of Rousseau, and the person to whom it was addressed, a certain
Monsieur Beloux of Paris, moved his place of residence immediately
after receiving the box, in other words, the ring.”

“I presume you refer to one of my cousins d’Andelle?”

“No,” replied Ganimard.

“Madame de Réal, then?”

“Yes.”

“You accuse my friend, Madam de Réal?” cried the countess, shocked and
amazed.

“I wish to ask you one question, madame,” said Ganimard. “Was Madam de
Réal present when you purchased the ring?”

“Yes, but we did not go there together.”

“Did she advise you to buy the ring?”

The countess considered for a moment, then said:

“Yes, I think she mentioned it first—”

“Thank you, madame. Your answer establishes the fact that it was Madame
de Réal who was the first to mention the ring, and it was she who
advised you to buy it.”

“But, I consider my friend is quite incapable—”

“Pardon me, countess, when I remind you that Madame de Réal is only a
casual acquaintance and not your intimate friend, as the newspapers
have announced. It was only last winter that you met her for the first
time. Now, I can prove that everything she has told you about herself,
her past life, and her relatives, is absolutely false; that Madame
Blanche de Réal had no actual existence before she met you, and she has
now ceased to exist.”

“Well?”

“Well?” replied Ganimard.

“Your story is a very strange one,” said the countess, “but it has no
application to our case. If Madame de Réal had taken the ring, how do
you explain the fact that it was found in Herr Bleichen’s tooth-powder?
Anyone who would take the risk and trouble of stealing the blue diamond
would certainly keep it. What do you say to that?”

“I—nothing—but Madame de Réal will answer it.”

“Oh! she does exist, then?”

“She does—and does not. I will explain in a few words. Three days ago,
while reading a newspaper, I glanced over the list of hotel arrivals at
Trouville, and there I read: ‘Hôtel Beaurivage—Madame de Réal, etc.’

“I went to Trouville immediately, and interviewed the proprietor of the
hotel. From the description and other information I received from him,
I concluded that she was the very Madame de Réal that I was seeking;
but she had left the hotel, giving her address in Paris as number three
rue de Colisée. The day before yesterday I went to that address, and
learned that there was no person there called Madame de Réal, but there
was a Madame Réal, living on the second floor, who acted as a diamond
broker and was frequently away from home. She had returned from a
journey on the preceding evening. Yesterday, I called on her and, under
an assumed name, I offered to act as an intermedium in the sale of some
diamonds to certain wealthy friends of mine. She is to meet me here
to-day to carry out that arrangement.”

“What! You expect her to come here?”

“Yes, at half-past five.”

“Are you sure it is she?”

“Madame de Réal of the Château de Crozon? Certainly. I have convincing
evidence of that fact. But ... listen!... I hear Folenfant’s signal.”

It was a whistle. Ganimard arose quickly.

“There is no time to lose. Monsieur and Madame de Crozon, will you be
kind enough to go into the next room. You also, Monsieur d’Hautrec, and
you, Monsieur Gerbois. The door will remain open, and when I give the
signal, you will come out. Of course, Chief, you will remain here.”

“We may be disturbed by other people,” said Mon. Dudouis.

“No. This is a new establishment, and the proprietor is one of my
friends. He will not let anyone disturb us—except the blonde Lady.”

“The blonde Lady! What do you mean?”

“Yes, the blonde Lady herself, chief; the friend and accomplice of
Arsène Lupin, the mysterious blonde Lady against whom I hold convincing
evidence; but, in addition to that, I wish to confront her with all the
people she has robbed.”

He looked through the window.

“I see her. She is coming in the door now. She can’t escape: Folenfant
and Dieuzy are guarding the door.... The blonde Lady is captured at
last, Chief!”

A moment later a woman appeared at the door; she was tall and slender,
with a very pale complexion and bright golden hair. Ganimard trembled
with excitement; he could not move, nor utter a word. She was there, in
front of him, at his mercy! What a victory over Arsène Lupin! And what
a revenge! And, at the same time, the victory was such an easy one that
he asked himself if the blonde Lady would not yet slip through his
fingers by one of those miracles that usually terminated the exploits
of Arsène Lupin. She remained standing near the door, surprised at the
silence, and looked about her without any display of suspicion or fear.

“She will get away! She will disappear!” thought Ganimard.

Then he managed to get between her and the door. She turned to go out.

“No, no!” he said. “Why are you going away?”

“Really, monsieur, I do not understand what this means. Allow me—”

“There is no reason why you should go, madame, and very good reasons
why you should remain.”

“But—”

“It is useless, madame. You cannot go.”

Trembling, she sat on a chair, and stammered:

“What is it you want?”

Ganimard had won the battle and captured the blonde Lady. He said to
her:

“Allow me to present the friend I mentioned, who desires to purchase
some diamonds. Have you procured the stones you promised to bring?”

“No—no—I don’t know. I don’t remember.”

“Come! Jog your memory! A person of your acquaintance intended to send
you a tinted stone.... ‘Something like the blue diamond,’ I said,
laughing; and you replied: ‘Exactly, I expect to have just what you
want.’ Do you remember?”

She made no reply. A small satchel fell from her hand. She picked it up
quickly, and held it securely. Her hands trembled slightly.

“Come!” said Ganimard, “I see you have no confidence in us, Madame de
Réal. I shall set you a good example by showing you what I have.”

He took from his pocketbook a paper which he unfolded, and disclosed a
lock of hair.

“These are a few hairs torn from the head of Antoinette Bréhat by the
Baron d’Hautrec, which I found clasped in his dead hand. I have shown
them to Mlle. Gerbois, who declares they are of the exact color of the
hair of the blonde Lady. Besides, they are exactly the color of your
hair—the identical color.”

Madame Réal looked at him in bewilderment, as if she did not understand
his meaning. He continued:

“And here are two perfume bottles, without labels, it is true, and
empty, but still sufficiently impregnated with their odor to enable
Mlle. Gerbois to recognize in them the perfume used by that blonde Lady
who was her traveling companion for two weeks. Now, one of these
bottles was found in the room that Madame de Réal occupied at the
Château de Crozon, and the other in the room that you occupied at the
Hôtel Beaurivage.”

“What do you say?... The blonde Lady ... the Château de Crozon....”

The detective did not reply. He took from his pocket and placed on the
table, side by side, four small sheets of paper. Then he said:

“I have, on these four pieces of paper, various specimens of
handwriting; the first is the writing of Antoinette Bréhat; the second
was written by the woman who sent the note to Baron Herschmann at the
auction sale of the blue diamond; the third is that of Madame de Réal,
written while she was stopping at the Château de Crozon; and the fourth
is your handwriting, madame ... it is your name and address, which you
gave to the porter of the Hôtel Beaurivage at Trouville. Now, compare
the four handwritings. They are identical.”

“What absurdity is this? really, monsieur, I do not understand. What
does it mean?”

“It means, madame,” exclaimed Ganimard, “that the blonde Lady, the
friend and accomplice of Arsène Lupin, is none other than you, Madame
Réal.”

Ganimard went to the adjoining room and returned with Mon. Gerbois,
whom he placed in front of Madame Réal, as he said:

“Monsieur Gerbois, is this the person who abducted your daughter, the
woman you saw at the house of Monsieur Detinan?”

“No.”

Ganimard was so surprised that he could not speak for a moment;
finally, he said: “No?... You must be mistaken....”

“I am not mistaken. Madame is blonde, it is true, and in that respect
resembles the blonde Lady; but, in all other respects, she is totally
different.”

“I can’t believe it. You must be mistaken.”

Ganimard called in his other witnesses.

“Monsieur d’Hautrec,” he said, “do you recognize Antoinette Bréhat?”

“No, this is not the person I saw at my uncle’s house.”

“This woman is not Madame de Réal,” declared the Count de Crozon.

That was the finishing touch. Ganimard was crushed. He was buried
beneath the ruins of the structure he had erected with so much care and
assurance. His pride was humbled, his spirit was broken, by the force
of this unexpected blow.

Mon. Dudouis arose, and said:

“We owe you an apology, madame, for this unfortunate mistake. But,
since your arrival here, I have noticed your nervous agitation.
Something troubles you; may I ask what it is?”

“Mon Dieu, monsieur, I was afraid. My satchel contains diamonds to the
value of a hundred thousand francs, and the conduct of your friend was
rather suspicious.”

“But you were frequently absent from Paris. How do you explain that?”

“I make frequent journeys to other cities in the course of my business.
That is all.”

Mon. Dudouis had nothing more to ask. He turned to his subordinate, and
said:

“Your investigation has been very superficial, Ganimard, and your
conduct toward this lady is really deplorable. You will come to my
office to-morrow and explain it.”

The interview was at an end, and Mon. Dudouis was about to leave the
room when a most annoying incident occurred. Madame Réal turned to
Ganimard, and said:

“I understand that you are Monsieur Ganimard. Am I right?”

“Yes.”

“Then, this letter must be for you. I received it this morning. It was
addressed to ‘Mon. Justin Ganimard, care of Madame Réal.’ I thought it
was a joke, because I did not know you under that name, but it appears
that your unknown correspondent knew of our rendezvous.”

Ganimard was inclined to put the letter in his pocket unread, but he
dared not do so in the presence of his superior, so he opened the
envelope and read the letter aloud, in an almost inaudible tone:

“Once upon a time, there were a blonde Lady, a Lupin, and a Ganimard.
Now, the wicked Ganimard had evil designs on the pretty blonde Lady,
and the good Lupin was her friend and protector. When the good Lupin
wished the blonde Lady to become the friend of the Countess de Crozon,
he caused her to assume the name of Madame de Réal, which is a close
resemblance to the name of a certain diamond broker, a woman with a
pale complexion and golden hair. And the good Lupin said to himself: If
ever the wicked Ganimard gets upon the track of the blonde Lady, how
useful it will be to me if he should be diverted to the track of the
honest diamond broker. A wise precaution that has borne good fruit. A
little note sent to the newspaper read by the wicked Ganimard, a
perfume bottle intentionally forgotten by the genuine blonde Lady at
the Hôtel Beaurivage, the name and address of Madame Réal written on
the hotel register by the genuine blonde Lady, and the trick is played.
What do you think of it, Ganimard? I wished to tell you the true story
of this affair, knowing that you would be the first to laugh over it.
Really, it is quite amusing, and I have enjoyed it very much.
    “Accept my best wishes, dear friend, and give my kind regards to
    the worthy Mon. Dudouis.


“ARSÈNE LUPIN.”


“He knows everything,” muttered Ganimard, but he did not see the humor
of the situation as Lupin had predicted. “He knows some things I have
never mentioned to any one. How could he find out that I was going to
invite you here, chief? How could he know that I had found the first
perfume bottle? How could he find out those things?”

He stamped his feet and tore his hair—a prey to the most tragic
despair. Mon. Dudouis felt sorry for him, and said:

“Come, Ganimard, never mind; try to do better next time.”

And Mon. Dudouis left the room, accompanied by Madame Réal.


During the next ten minutes, Ganimard read and re-read the letter of
Arsène Lupin. Monsieur and Madame de Crozon, Monsieur d’Hautrec and
Monsieur Gerbois were holding an animated discussion in a corner of the
room. At last, the count approached the detective, and said:

“My dear monsieur, after your investigation, we are no nearer the truth
than we were before.”

“Pardon me, but my investigation has established these facts: that the
blonde Lady is the mysterious heroine of these exploits, and that
Arsène Lupin directed them.”

“Those facts do not solve the mystery; in fact, they render it more
obscure. The blonde Lady commits a murder in order to steal the blue
diamond, and yet she does not steal it. Afterward she steals it and
gets rid of it by secretly giving it to another person. How do you
explain her strange conduct?”

“I cannot explain it.”

“Of course; but, perhaps, someone else can.”

“Who?”

The Count hesitated, so the Countess replied, frankly:

“There is only one man besides yourself who is competent to enter the
arena with Arsène Lupin and overcome him. Have you any objection to our
engaging the services of Herlock Sholmes in this case?”

Ganimard was vexed at the question, but stammered a reply:

“No ... but ... I do not understand what——”

“Let me explain. All this mystery annoys me. I wish to have it cleared
up. Monsieur Gerbois and Monsieur d’Hautrec have the same desire, and
we have agreed to send for the celebrated English detective.”

“You are right, madame,” replied the detective, with a loyalty that did
him credit, “you are right. Old Ganimard is not able to overcome Arsène
Lupin. But will Herlock Sholmes succeed? I hope so, as I have the
greatest admiration for him. But ... it is improbable.”

“Do you mean to say that he will not succeed?”

“That is my opinion. I can foresee the result of a duel between Herlock
Sholmes and Arsène Lupin. The Englishman will be defeated.”

“But, in any event, can we count on your assistance?”

“Quite so, madame. I shall be pleased to render Monsieur Sholmes all
possible assistance.”

“Do you know his address?”

“Yes; 219 Parker street.”

That evening Monsieur and Madame de Crozon withdrew the charge they had
made against Herr Bleichen, and a joint letter was addressed to Herlock
Sholmes.




CHAPTER III.
HERLOCK SHOLMES OPENS HOSTILITIES.


“What does monsieur wish?”

“Anything,” replied Arsène Lupin, like a man who never worries over the
details of a meal; “anything you like, but no meat or alcohol.”

The waiter walked away, disdainfully.

“What! still a vegetarian?” I exclaimed.

“More so than ever,” replied Lupin.

“Through taste, faith, or habit?”

“Hygiene.”

“And do you never fall from grace?”

“Oh! yes ... when I am dining out ... and wish to avoid being
considered eccentric.”

We were dining near the Northern Railway station, in a little
restaurant to which Arsène Lupin had invited me. Frequently he would
send me a telegram asking me to meet him in some obscure restaurant,
where we could enjoy a quiet dinner, well served, and which was always
made interesting to me by his recital of some startling adventure
theretofore unknown to me.

On that particular evening he appeared to be in a more lively mood than
usual. He laughed and joked with careless animation, and with that
delicate sarcasm that was habitual with him—a light and spontaneous
sarcasm that was quite free from any tinge of malice. It was a pleasure
to find him in that jovial mood, and I could not resist the desire to
tell him so.

“Ah! yes,” he exclaimed, “there are days in which I find life as bright
and gay as a spring morning; then life seems to be an infinite treasure
which I can never exhaust. And yet God knows I lead a careless
existence!”

“Too much so, perhaps.”

“Ah! but I tell you, the treasure is infinite. I can spend it with a
lavish hand. I can cast my youth and strength to the four winds of
Heaven, and it is replaced by a still younger and greater force.
Besides, my life is so pleasant!... If I wished to do so, I might
become—what shall I say?... An orator, a manufacturer, a politician....
But, I assure you, I shall never have such a desire. Arsène Lupin, I
am; Arsène Lupin, I shall remain. I have made a vain search in history
to find a career comparable to mine; a life better filled or more
intense.... Napoleon? Yes, perhaps.... But Napoleon, toward the close
of his career, when all Europe was trying to crush him, asked himself
on the eve of each battle if it would not be his last.”

Was he serious? Or was he joking? He became more animated as he
proceeded:

“That is everything, do you understand, the danger! The continuous
feeling of danger! To breathe it as you breathe the air, to scent it in
every breath of wind, to detect it in every unusual sound.... And, in
the midst of the tempest, to remain calm ... and not to stumble!
Otherwise, you are lost. There is only one sensation equal to it: that
of the chauffeur in an automobile race. But that race lasts only a few
hours; my race continues until death!”

“What fantasy!” I exclaimed. “And you wish me to believe that you have
no particular motive for your adoption of that exciting life?”

“Come,” he said, with a smile, “you are a clever psychologist. Work it
out for yourself.”

He poured himself a glass of water, drank it, and said:

“Did you read _‘Le Temps’_ to-day?”

“No.”

“Herlock Sholmes crossed the Channel this afternoon, and arrived in
Paris about six o’clock.”

“The deuce! What is he coming for?”

“A little journey he has undertaken at the request of the Count and
Countess of Crozon, Monsieur Gerbois, and the nephew of Baron
d’Hautrec. They met him at the Northern Railway station, took him to
meet Ganimard, and, at this moment, the six of them are holding a
consultation.”

Despite a strong temptation to do so, I had never ventured to question
Arsène Lupin concerning any action of his private life, unless he had
first mentioned the subject to me. Up to that moment his name had not
been mentioned, at least officially, in connection with the blue
diamond. Consequently, I consumed my curiosity in patience. He
continued:

“There is also in _‘Le Temps’_ an interview with my old friend
Ganimard, according to whom a certain blonde lady, who should be my
friend, must have murdered the Baron d’Hautrec and tried to rob Madame
de Crozon of her famous ring. And—what do you think?—he accuses me of
being the instigator of those crimes.”

I could not suppress a slight shudder. Was this true? Must I believe
that his career of theft, his mode of existence, the logical result of
such a life, had drawn that man into more serious crimes, including
murder? I looked at him. He was so calm, and his eyes had such a frank
expression! I observed his hands: they had been formed from a model of
exceeding delicacy, long and slender; inoffensive, truly; and the hands
of an artist....

“Ganimard has pipe-dreams,” I said.

“No, no!” protested Lupin. “Ganimard has some cleverness; and, at
times, almost inspiration.”

“Inspiration!”

“Yes. For instance, that interview is a master-stroke. In the first
place, he announces the coming of his English rival in order to put me
on my guard, and make his task more difficult. In the second place, he
indicates the exact point to which he has conducted the affair in order
that Sholmes will not get credit for the work already done by Ganimard.
That is good warfare.”

“Whatever it may be, you have two adversaries to deal with, and such
adversaries!”

“Oh! one of them doesn’t count.”

“And the other?”

“Sholmes? Oh! I confess he is a worthy foe; and that explains my
present good humor. In the first place, it is a question of
self-esteem; I am pleased to know that they consider me a subject
worthy the attention of the celebrated English detective. In the next
place, just imagine the pleasure a man, such as I, must experience in
the thought of a duel with Herlock Sholmes. But I shall be obliged to
strain every muscle; he is a clever fellow, and will contest every inch
of the ground.”

“Then you consider him a strong opponent?”

“I do. As a detective, I believe, he has never had an equal. But I have
one advantage over him; he is making the attack and I am simply
defending myself. My rôle is the easier one. Besides, I am familiar
with his method of warfare, and he does not know mine. I am prepared to
show him a few new tricks that will give him something to think about.”

He tapped the table with his fingers as he uttered the following
sentences, with an air of keen delight:

“Arsène Lupin against Herlock Sholmes.... France against England....
Trafalgar will be revenged at last.... Ah! the rascal ... he doesn’t
suspect that I am prepared ... and a Lupin warned—”

He stopped suddenly, seized with a fit of coughing, and hid his face in
his napkin, as if something had stuck in his throat.

“A bit of bread?” I inquired. “Drink some water.”

“No, it isn’t that,” he replied, in a stifled voice.

“Then, what is it?”

“The want of air.”

“Do you wish a window opened?”

“No, I shall go out. Give me my hat and overcoat, quick! I must go.”

“What’s the matter?”

“The two gentlemen who came in just now.... Look at the taller one ...
now, when we go out, keep to my left, so he will not see me.”

“The one who is sitting behind you?”

“Yes. I will explain it to you, outside.”

“Who is it?”

“Herlock Sholmes.”

He made a desperate effort to control himself, as if he were ashamed of
his emotion, replaced his napkin, drank a glass of water, and, quite
recovered, said to me, smiling:

“It is strange, hein, that I should be affected so easily, but that
unexpected sight—”

“What have you to fear, since no one can recognize you, on account of
your many transformations? Every time I see you it seems to me your
face is changed; it’s not at all familiar. I don’t know why.”

“But _he_ would recognize me,” said Lupin. “He has seen me only once;
but, at that time, he made a mental photograph of me—not of my external
appearance but of my very soul—not what I appear to be but just what I
am. Do you understand? And then ... and then.... I did not expect to
meet him here.... Such a strange encounter!... in this little
restaurant....”

“Well, shall we go out?”

“No, not now,” said Lupin.

“What are you going to do?”

“The better way is to act frankly ... to have confidence in him—trust
him....”

“You will not speak to him?”

“Why not? It will be to my advantage to do so, and find out what he
knows, and, perhaps, what he thinks. At present I have the feeling that
his gaze is on my neck and shoulders, and that he is trying to remember
where he has seen them before.”

He reflected a moment. I observed a malicious smile at the corner of
his mouth; then, obedient, I think, to a whim of his impulsive nature,
and not to the necessities of the situation, he arose, turned around,
and, with a bow and a joyous air, he said:

“By what lucky chance? Ah! I am delighted to see you. Permit me to
introduce a friend of mine.”

For a moment the Englishman was disconcerted; then he made a movement
as if he would seize Arsène Lupin. The latter shook his head, and said:

“That would not be fair; besides, the movement would be an awkward one
and ... quite useless.”

The Englishman looked about him, as if in search of assistance.

“No use,” said Lupin. “Besides, are you quite sure you can place your
hand on me? Come, now, show me that you are a real Englishman and,
therefore, a good sport.”

This advice seemed to commend itself to the detective, for he partially
rose and said, very formally:

“Monsieur Wilson, my friend and assistant—Monsieur Arsène Lupin.”

Wilson’s amazement evoked a laugh. With bulging eyes and gaping mouth,
he looked from one to the other, as if unable to comprehend the
situation. Herlock Sholmes laughed and said:

“Wilson, you should conceal your astonishment at an incident which is
one of the most natural in the world.”

“Why do you not arrest him?” stammered Wilson.

“Have you not observed, Wilson, that the gentleman is between me and
the door, and only a few steps from the door. By the time I could move
my little finger he would be outside.”

“Don’t let that make any difference,” said Lupin, who now walked around
the table and seated himself so that the Englishman was between him and
the door—thus placing himself at the mercy of the foreigner.

Wilson looked at Sholmes to find out if he had the right to admire this
act of wanton courage. The Englishman’s face was impenetrable; but, a
moment later, he called:

“Waiter!”

When the waiter came he ordered soda, beer and whisky. The treaty of
peace was signed—until further orders. In a few moments the four men
were conversing in an apparently friendly manner.


Herlock Sholmes is a man such as you might meet every day in the
business world. He is about fifty years of age, and looks as if he
might have passed his life in an office, adding up columns of dull
figures or writing out formal statements of business accounts. There
was nothing to distinguish him from the average citizen of London,
except the appearance of his eyes, his terribly keen and penetrating
eyes.

But then he is Herlock Sholmes—which means that he is a wonderful
combination of intuition, observation, clairvoyance and ingenuity. One
could readily believe that nature had been pleased to take the two most
extraordinary detectives that the imagination of man has hitherto
conceived, the Dupin of Edgar Allen Poe and the Lecoq of Emile
Gaboriau, and, out of that material, constructed a new detective, more
extraordinary and supernatural than either of them. And when a person
reads the history of his exploits, which have made him famous
throughout the entire world, he asks himself whether Herlock Sholmes is
not a mythical personage, a fictitious hero born in the brain of a
great novelist—Conan Doyle, for instance.

When Arsène Lupin questioned him in regard to the length of his sojourn
in France he turned the conversation into its proper channel by saying:

“That depends on you, monsieur.”

“Oh!” exclaimed Lupin, laughing, “if it depends on me you can return to
England to-night.”

“That is a little too soon, but I expect to return in the course of
eight or nine days—ten at the outside.”

“Are you in such a hurry?”

“I have many cases to attend to; such as the robbery of the
Anglo-Chinese Bank, the abduction of Lady Eccleston.... But, don’t you
think, Monsieur Lupin, that I can finish my business in Paris within a
week?”

“Certainly, if you confine your efforts to the case of the blue
diamond. It is, moreover, the length of time that I require to make
preparations for my safety in case the solution of that affair should
give you certain dangerous advantages over me.”

“And yet,” said the Englishman, “I expect to close the business in
eight or ten days.”

“And arrest me on the eleventh, perhaps?”

“No, the tenth is my limit.”

Lupin shook his head thoughtfully, as he said:

“That will be difficult—very difficult.”

“Difficult, perhaps, but possible, therefore certain—”

“Absolutely certain,” said Wilson, as if he had clearly worked out the
long series of operations which would conduct his collaborator to the
desired result.

“Of course,” said Herlock Sholmes, “I do not hold all the trump cards,
as these cases are already several months old, and I lack certain
information and clues upon which I am accustomed to base my
investigations.”

“Such as spots of mud and cigarette ashes,” said Wilson, with an air of
importance.

“In addition to the remarkable conclusions formed by Monsieur Ganimard,
I have obtained all the articles written on the subject, and have
formed a few deductions of my own.”

“Some ideas which were suggested to us by analysis or hypothesis,”
added Wilson, sententiously.

“I wish to enquire,” said Arsène Lupin, in that deferential tone which
he employed in speaking to Sholmes, “would I be indiscreet if I were to
ask you what opinion you have formed about the case?”

Really, it was a most exciting situation to see those two men facing
each other across the table, engaged in an earnest discussion as if
they were obliged to solve some abstruse problem or come to an
agreement upon some controverted fact. Wilson was in the seventh heaven
of delight. Herlock Sholmes filled his pipe slowly, lighted it, and
said:

“This affair is much simpler than it appeared to be at first sight.”

“Much simpler,” said Wilson, as a faithful echo.

“I say ‘this affair,’ for, in my opinion, there is only one,” said
Sholmes. “The death of the Baron d’Hautrec, the story of the ring, and,
let us not forget, the mystery of lottery ticket number 514, are only
different phases of what one might call the mystery of the blonde Lady.
Now, according to my view, it is simply a question of discovering the
bond that unites those three episodes in the same story—the fact which
proves the unity of the three events. Ganimard, whose judgment is
rather superficial, finds that unity in the faculty of disappearance;
that is, in the power of coming and going unseen and unheard. That
theory does not satisfy me.”

“Well, what is your idea?” asked Lupin.

“In my opinion,” said Sholmes, “the characteristic feature of the three
episodes is your design and purpose of leading the affair into a
certain channel previously chosen by you. It is, on your part, more
than a plan; it is a necessity, an indispensable condition of success.”

“Can you furnish any details of your theory?”

“Certainly. For example, from the beginning of your conflict with
Monsieur Gerbois, is it not evident that the apartment of Monsieur
Detinan is the place selected by you, the inevitable spot where all the
parties must meet? In your opinion, it was the only safe place, and you
arranged a rendezvous there, publicly, one might say, for the blonde
Lady and Mademoiselle Gerbois.”

“The professor’s daughter,” added Wilson.

“Now, let us consider the case of the blue diamond. Did you try to
appropriate it while the Baron d’Hautrec possessed it? No. But the
baron takes his brother’s house. Six months later we have the
intervention of Antoinette Bréhat and the first attempt. The diamond
escapes you, and the sale is widely advertised to take place at the
Drouot auction-rooms. Will it be a free and open sale? Is the richest
amateur sure to carry off the jewel? No. Just as the banker Herschmann
is on the point of buying the ring, a lady sends him a letter of
warning, and it is the Countess de Crozon, prepared and influenced by
the same lady, who becomes the purchaser of the diamond. Will the ring
disappear at once? No; you lack the opportunity. Therefore, you must
wait. At last the Countess goes to her château. That is what you were
waiting for. The ring disappears.”

“To reappear again in the tooth-powder of Herr Bleichen,” remarked
Lupin.

“Oh! such nonsense!” exclaimed Sholmes, striking the table with his
fist, “don’t tell me such a fairy tale. I am too old a fox to be led
away by a false scent.”

“What do you mean?”

“What do I mean?” said Sholmes, then paused a moment as if he wished to
arrange his effect. At last he said:

“The blue diamond that was found in the tooth-powder was false. You
kept the genuine stone.”

Arsène Lupin remained silent for a moment; then, with his eyes fixed on
the Englishman, he replied, calmly:

“You are impertinent, monsieur.”

“Impertinent, indeed!” repeated Wilson, beaming with admiration.

“Yes,” said Lupin, “and, yet, to do you credit, you have thrown a
strong light on a very mysterious subject. Not a magistrate, not a
special reporter, who has been engaged on this case, has come so near
the truth. It is a marvellous display of intuition and logic.”

“Oh! a person has simply to use his brains,” said Herlock Sholmes,
nattered at the homage of the expert criminal.

“And so few have any brains to use,” replied Lupin. “And, now, that the
field of conjectures has been narrowed down, and the rubbish cleared
away——”

“Well, now, I have simply to discover why the three episodes were
enacted at 25 rue Clapeyron, 134 avenue Henri-Martin, and within the
walls of the Château de Crozon and my work will be finished. What
remains will be child’s play. Don’t you think so?”

“Yes, I think you are right.”

“In that case, Monsieur Lupin, am I wrong in saying that my business
will be finished in ten days?”

“In ten days you will know the whole truth,” said Lupin.

“And you will be arrested.”

“No.”

“No?”

“In order that I may be arrested there must occur such a series of
improbable and unexpected misfortunes that I cannot admit the
possibility of such an event.”

“We have a saying in England that ‘the unexpected always happens.’”

They looked at each other for a moment calmly and fearlessly, without
any display of bravado or malice. They met as equals in a contest of
wit and skill. And this meeting was the formal crossing of swords,
preliminary to the duel.

“Ah!” exclaimed Lupin, “at last I shall have an adversary worthy of the
name—one whose defeat will be the proudest achievement in my career.”

“Are you not afraid!” asked Wilson.

“Almost, Monsieur Wilson,” replied Lupin, rising from his chair, “and
the proof is that I am about to make a hasty retreat. Then, we will say
ten days, Monsieur Sholmes?”

“Yes, ten days. This is Sunday. A week from next Wednesday, at eight
o’clock in the evening, it will be all over.”

“And I shall be in prison?”

“No doubt of it.”

“Ha! not a pleasant outlook for a man who gets so much enjoyment out of
life as I do. No cares, a lively interest in the affairs of the world,
a justifiable contempt for the police, and the consoling sympathy of
numerous friends and admirers. And now, behold, all that is about to be
changed! It is the reverse side of the medal. After sunshine comes the
rain. It is no longer a laughing matter. Adieu!”

“Hurry up!” said Wilson, full of solicitude for a person in whom
Herlock Sholmes had inspired so much respect, “do not lose a minute.”

“Not a minute, Monsieur Wilson; but I wish to express my pleasure at
having met you, and to tell you how much I envy the master in having
such a valuable assistant as you seem to be.”

Then, after they had courteously saluted each other, like adversaries
in a duel who entertain no feeling of malice but are obliged to fight
by force of circumstances, Lupin seized me by the arm and drew me
outside.

“What do you think of it, dear boy? The strange events of this evening
will form an interesting chapter in the memoirs you are now preparing
for me.”

He closed the door of the restaurant behind us, and, after taking a few
steps, he stopped and said:

“Do you smoke?”

“No. Nor do you, it seems to me.”

“You are right, I don’t.”

He lighted a cigarette with a wax-match, which he shook several times
in an effort to extinguish it. But he threw away the cigarette
immediately, ran across the street, and joined two men who emerged from
the shadows as if called by a signal. He conversed with them for a few
minutes on the opposite sidewalk, and then returned to me.

“I beg your pardon, but I fear that cursed Sholmes is going to give me
trouble. But, I assure you, he is not yet through with Arsène Lupin. He
will find out what kind of fuel I use to warm my blood. And now—au
revoir! The genial Wilson is right; there is not a moment to lose.”

He walked away rapidly.

Thus ended the events of that exciting evening, or, at least, that part
of them in which I was a participant. Subsequently, during the course
of the evening, other stirring incidents occurred which have come to my
knowledge through the courtesy of other members of that unique
dinner-party.


At the very moment in which Lupin left me, Herlock Sholmes rose from
the table, and looked at his watch.

“Twenty minutes to nine. At nine o’clock I am to meet the Count and
Countess at the railway station.”

“Then, we must be off!” exclaimed Wilson, between two drinks of whisky.

They left the restaurant.

“Wilson, don’t look behind. We may be followed, and, in that case, let
us act as if we did not care. Wilson, I want your opinion: why was
Lupin in that restaurant?”

“To get something to eat,” replied Wilson, quickly.

“Wilson, I must congratulate you on the accuracy of your deduction. I
couldn’t have done better myself.”

Wilson blushed with pleasure, and Sholmes continued:

“To get something to eat. Very well, and, after that, probably, to
assure himself whether I am going to the Château de Crozon, as
announced by Ganimard in his interview. I must go in order not to
disappoint him. But, in order to gain time on him, I shall not go.”

“Ah!” said Wilson, nonplused.

“You, my friend, will walk down this street, take a carriage, two,
three carriages. Return later and get the valises that we left at the
station, and make for the Elysée-Palace at a galop.”

“And when I reach the Elysée-Palace?”

“Engage a room, go to sleep, and await my orders.”

Quite proud of the important rôle assigned to him, Wilson set out to
perform his task. Herlock Sholmes proceeded to the railway station,
bought a ticket, and repaired to the Amiens’ express in which the Count
and Countess de Crozon were already installed. He bowed to them,
lighted his pipe, and had a quiet smoke in the corridor. The train
started. Ten minutes later he took a seat beside the Countess, and said
to her:

“Have you the ring here, madame?”

“Yes.”

“Will you kindly let me see it?”

He took it, and examined it closely.

“Just as I suspected: it is a manufactured diamond.”

“A manufactured diamond?”

“Yes; a new process which consists in submitting diamond dust to a
tremendous heat until it melts and is then molded into a single stone.”

“But my diamond is genuine.”

“Yes, _your_ diamond is; but this is not yours.”

“Where is mine?”

“It is held by Arsène Lupin.”

“And this stone?”

“Was substituted for yours, and slipped into Herr Bleichen’s
tooth-powder, where it was afterwards found.”

“Then you think this is false?”

“Absolutely false.”

The Countess was overwhelmed with surprise and grief, while her husband
scrutinized the diamond with an incredulous air. Finally she stammered:

“Is it possible? And why did they not merely steal it and be done with
it? And how did they steal it?”

“That is exactly what I am going to find out.”

“At the Château de Crozon?”

“No. I shall leave the train at Creil and return to Paris. It is there
the game between me and Arsène Lupin must be played. In fact, the game
has commenced already, and Lupin thinks I am on my way to the château.”

“But—”

“What does it matter to you, madame? The essential thing is your
diamond, is it not?”

“Yes.”

“Well, don’t worry. I have just undertaken a much more difficult task
than that. You have my promise that I will restore the true diamond to
you within ten days.”

The train slackened its speed. He put the false diamond in his pocket
and opened the door. The Count cried out:

“That is the wrong side of the train. You are getting out on the
tracks.”

“That is my intention. If Lupin has anyone on my track, he will lose
sight of me now. Adieu.”

An employee protested in vain. After the departure of the train, the
Englishman sought the station-master’s office. Forty minutes later he
leaped into a train that landed him in Paris shortly before midnight.
He ran across the platform, entered the lunch-room, made his exit at
another door, and jumped into a cab.

“Driver—rue Clapeyron.”

Having reached the conclusion that he was not followed, he stopped the
carriage at the end of the street, and proceeded to make a careful
examination of Monsieur Detinan’s house and the two adjoining houses.
He made measurements of certain distances and entered the figures in
his notebook.

“Driver—avenue Henri-Martin.”

At the corner of the avenue and the rue de la Pompe, he dismissed the
carriage, walked down the street to number 134, and performed the same
operations in front of the house of the late Baron d’Hautrec and the
two adjoining houses, measuring the width of the respective façades and
calculating the depth of the little gardens that stood in front of
them.

The avenue was deserted, and was very dark under its four rows of
trees, between which, at considerable intervals, a few gas-lamps
struggled in vain to light the deep shadows. One of them threw a dim
light over a portion of the house, and Sholmes perceived the “To-let”
sign posted on the gate, the neglected walks which encircled the small
lawn, and the large bare windows of the vacant house.

“I suppose,” he said to himself, “the house has been unoccupied since
the death of the baron.... Ah! if I could only get in and view the
scene of the murder!”

No sooner did the idea occur to him than he sought to put it in
execution. But how could he manage it? He could not climb over the
gate; it was too high. So he took from his pocket an electric lantern
and a skeleton key which he always carried. Then, to his great
surprise, he discovered that the gate was not locked; in fact, it was
open about three or four inches. He entered the garden, and was careful
to leave the gate as he had found it—partly open. But he had not taken
many steps from the gate when he stopped. He had seen a light pass one
of the windows on the second floor.

He saw the light pass a second window and a third, but he saw nothing
else, except a silhouette outlined on the walls of the rooms. The light
descended to the first floor, and, for a long time, wandered from room
to room.

“Who the deuce is walking, at one o’clock in the morning, through the
house in which the Baron d’Hautrec was killed?” Herlock Sholmes asked
himself, deeply interested.

There was only one way to find out, and that was to enter the house
himself. He did not hesitate, but started for the door of the house.
However, at the moment when he crossed the streak of gaslight that came
from the street-lamp, the man must have seen him, for the light in the
house was suddenly extinguished and Herlock Sholmes did not see it
again. Softly, he tried the door. It was open, also. Hearing no sound,
he advanced through the hallway, encountered the foot of the stairs,
and ascended to the first floor. Here there was the same silence, the
same darkness.

He entered, one of the rooms and approached a window through which came
a feeble light from the outside. On looking through the window he saw
the man, who had no doubt descended by another stairway and escaped by
another door. The man was threading his way through the shrubbery which
bordered the wall that separated the two gardens.

“The deuce!” exclaimed Sholmes, “he is going to escape.”

He hastened down the stairs and leaped over the steps in his eagerness
to cut off the man’s retreat. But he did not see anyone, and, owing to
the darkness, it was several seconds before he was able to distinguish
a bulky form moving through the shrubbery. This gave the Englishman
food for reflection. Why had the man not made his escape, which he
could have done so easily? Had he remained in order to watch the
movements of the intruder who had disturbed him in his mysterious work?

“At all events,” concluded Sholmes, “it is not Lupin; he would be more
adroit. It may be one of his men.”

For several minutes Herlock Sholmes remained motionless, with his gaze
fixed on the adversary who, in his turn was watching the detective. But
as that adversary had become passive, and as the Englishman was not one
to consume his time in idle waiting, he examined his revolver to see if
it was in good working order, remove his knife from its sheath, and
walked toward the enemy with that cool effrontery and scorn of danger
for which he had become famous.

He heard a clicking sound; it was his adversary preparing his revolver.
Herlock Sholmes dashed boldly into the thicket, and grappled with his
foe. There was a sharp, desperate struggle, in the course of which
Sholmes suspected that the man was trying to draw a knife. But the
Englishman, believing his antagonist to be an accomplice of Arsène
Lupin and anxious to win the first trick in the game with that
redoubtable foe, fought with unusual strength and determination. He
hurled his adversary to the ground, held him there with the weight of
his body, and, gripping him by the throat with one hand, he used his
free hand to take out his electric lantern, press the button, and throw
the light over the face of his prisoner.

“Wilson!” he exclaimed, in amazement.

“Herlock Sholmes!” stammered a weak, stifled voice.


For a long time they remained silent, astounded, foolish. The shriek of
an automobile rent the air. A slight breeze stirred the leaves.
Suddenly, Herlock Sholmes seized his friend by the shoulders and shook
him violently, as he cried:

“What are you doing here? Tell me.... What?... Did I tell you to hide
in the bushes and spy on me?”

“Spy on you!” muttered Wilson, “why, I didn’t know it was you.”

“But what are you doing here? You ought to be in bed.”

“I was in bed.”

“You ought to be asleep.”

“I was asleep.”

“Well, what brought you here?” asked Sholmes.

“Your letter.”

“My letter? I don’t understand.”

“Yes, a messenger brought it to me at the hotel.”

“From me? Are you crazy?”

“It is true—I swear it.”

“Where is the letter?”

Wilson handed him a sheet of paper, which he read by the light of his
lantern. It was as follows:

“Wilson, come at once to avenue Henri-Martin. The house is empty.
Inspect the whole place and make an exact plan. Then return to
hotel.—Herlock Sholmes.”

“I was measuring the rooms,” said Wilson, “when I saw a shadow in the
garden. I had only one idea——”

“That was to seize the shadow.... The idea was excellent.... But
remember this, Wilson, whenever you receive a letter from me, be sure
it is my handwriting and not a forgery.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Wilson, as the truth dawned on him, “then the letter
wasn’t from you?”

“No.”

“Who sent it, then?”

“Arsène Lupin.”

“Why? For what purpose?” asked Wilson.

“I don’t know, and that’s what worries me. I don’t understand why he
took the trouble to disturb you. Of course, if he had sent me on such a
foolish errand I wouldn’t be surprised; but what was his object in
disturbing you?”

“I must hurry back to the hotel.”

“So must I, Wilson.”

They arrived at the gate. Wilson, who was ahead, took hold of it and
pulled.

“Ah! you closed it?” he said.

“No, I left it partly open.”

Sholmes tried the gate; then, alarmed, he examined the lock. An oath
escaped him:

“Good God! it is locked! locked with a key!”

He shook the gate with all his strength; then, realizing the futility
of his efforts, he dropped his arms, discouraged, and muttered, in a
jerky manner:

“I can see it all now—it is Lupin. He foresaw that I would leave the
train at Creil, and he prepared this neat little trap for me in case I
should commence my investigation this evening. Moreover, he was kind
enough to send me a companion to share my captivity. All done to make
me lose a day, and, perhaps, also, to teach me to mind my own
business.”

“Do you mean to say we are prisoners?”

“Exactly. Herlock Sholmes and Wilson are the prisoners of Arsène Lupin.
It’s a bad beginning; but he laughs best who laughs last.”

Wilson seized Sholmes’ arm, and exclaimed:

“Look!... Look up there!... A light....”

A light shone through one of the windows of the first floor. Both of
them ran to the house, and each ascended by the stairs he had used on
coming out a short time before, and they met again at the entrance to
the lighted chamber. A small piece of a candle was burning in the
center of the room. Beside it there was a basket containing a bottle, a
roasted chicken, and a loaf of bread.

Sholmes was greatly amused, and laughed heartily.

“Wonderful! we are invited to supper. It is really an enchanted place,
a genuine fairy-land. Come, Wilson, cheer up! this is not a funeral.
It’s all very funny.”

“Are you quite sure it is so very funny?” asked Wilson, in a lugubrious
tone.

“Am I sure?” exclaimed Sholmes, with a gaiety that was too boisterous
to be natural, “why, to tell the truth, it’s the funniest thing I ever
saw. It’s a jolly good comedy! What a master of sarcasm this Arsène
Lupin is! He makes a fool of you with the utmost grace and delicacy. I
wouldn’t miss this feast for all the money in the Bank of England.
Come, Wilson, you grieve me. You should display that nobility of
character which rises superior to misfortune. I don’t see that you have
any cause for complaint, really, I don’t.”

After a time, by dint of good humor and sarcasm, he managed to restore
Wilson to his normal mood, and make him swallow a morsel of chicken and
a glass of wine. But when the candle went out and they prepared to
spend the night there, with the bare floor for a mattress and the hard
wall for a pillow, the harsh and ridiculous side of the situation was
impressed upon them. That particular incident will not form a pleasant
page in the memoirs of the famous detective.

Next morning Wilson awoke, stiff and cold. A slight noise attracted his
attention: Herlock Sholmes was kneeling on the floor, critically
examining some grains of sand and studying some chalk-marks, now almost
effaced, which formed certain figures and numbers, which figures he
entered in his notebook.

Accompanied by Wilson, who was deeply interested in the work, he
examined each room, and found similar chalk-marks in two other
apartments. He noticed, also, two circles on the oaken panels, an arrow
on a wainscot, and four figures on four steps of the stairs. At the end
of an hour Wilson said:

“The figures are correct, aren’t they?”

“I don’t know; but, at all events, they mean something,” replied
Sholmes, who had forgotten the discomforts of the night in the joy
created by his new discoveries.

“It is quite obvious,” said Wilson, “they represent the number of
pieces in the floor.”

“Ah!”

“Yes. And the two circles indicate that the panels are false, as you
can readily ascertain, and the arrow points in the direction in which
the panels move.”

Herlock Sholmes looked at Wilson, in astonishment.

“Ah! my dear friend, how do you know all that? Your clairvoyance makes
my poor ability in that direction look quite insignificant.”

“Oh! it is very simple,” said Wilson, inflated with pride; “I examined
those marks last night, according to your instructions, or, rather,
according to the instructions of Arsène Lupin, since he wrote the
letter you sent to me.”

At that moment Wilson faced a greater danger than he had during his
struggle in the garden with Herlock Sholmes. The latter now felt a
furious desire to strangle him. But, dominating his feelings, Sholmes
made a grimace which was intended for a smile, and said:

“Quite so, Wilson, you have done well, and your work shows commendable
progress. But, tell me, have you exercised your powers of observation
and analysis on any other points? I might profit by your deductions.”

“Oh! no, I went no farther.”

“That’s a pity. Your début was such a promising one. But, since that is
all, we may as well go.”

“Go! but how can we get out?”

“The way all honest people go out: through the gate.”

“But it is locked.”

“It will be opened.”

“By whom?”

“Please call the two policemen who are strolling down the avenue.”

“But——”

“But what?”

“It is very humiliating. What will be said when it becomes known that
Herlock Sholmes and Wilson were the prisoners of Arsène Lupin?”

“Of course, I understand they will roar with laughter,” replied Herlock
Sholmes, in a dry voice and with frowning features, “but we can’t set
up housekeeping in this place.”

“And you will not try to find another way out?”

“No.”

“But the man who brought us the basket of provisions did not cross the
garden, coming or going. There is some other way out. Let us look for
it, and not bother with the police.”

“Your argument is sound, but you forget that all the detectives in
Paris have been trying to find it for the last six months, and that I
searched the house from top to bottom while you were asleep. Ah! my
dear Wilson, we have not been accustomed to pursue such game as Arsène
Lupin. He leaves no trail behind him.”


At eleven o’clock, Herlock Sholmes and Wilson were liberated, and
conducted to the nearest police station, where the commissary, after
subjecting them to a severe examination, released them with an
affectation of good-will that was quite exasperating.

“I am very sorry, messieurs, that this unfortunate incident has
occurred. You will have a very poor opinion of French hospitality. Mon
Dieu! what a night you must have passed! Ah! that rascally Lupin is no
respecter of persons.”

They took a carriage to their hotel. At the office Wilson asked for the
key of his room.

After some search the clerk replied, much astonished:

“But, monsieur, you have given up the room.”

“I gave it up? When?”

“This morning, by the letter your friend brought here.”

“What friend?”

“The gentleman who brought your letter.... Ah! your card is still
attached to the letter. Here they are.”

Wilson looked at them. Certainly, it was one of his cards, and the
letter was in his handwriting.

“Good Lord!” he muttered, “this is another of his tricks,” and he
added, aloud: “Where is my luggage?”

“Your friend took it.”

“Ah!... and you gave it to him?”

“Certainly; on the strength of your letter and card.”

“Of course ... of course.”

They left the hotel and walked, slowly and thoughtfully, through the
Champs-Elysées. The avenue was bright and cheerful beneath a clear
autumn sun; the air was mild and pleasant.

At Rond-Point, Herlock Sholmes lighted his pipe. Then Wilson spoke:

“I can’t understand you, Sholmes. You are so calm and unruffled. They
play with you as a cat plays with a mouse, and yet you do not say a
word.”

Sholmes stopped, as he replied:

“Wilson, I was thinking of your card.”

“Well?”

“The point is this: here is a man who, in view of a possible struggle
with us, procures specimens of our handwriting, and who holds, in his
possession, one or more of your cards. Now, have you considered how
much precaution and skill those facts represent?”

“Well?”

“Well, Wilson, to overcome an enemy so well prepared and so thoroughly
equipped requires the infinite shrewdness of ... of a Herlock Sholmes.
And yet, as you have seen, Wilson, I have lost the first round.”


At six o’clock the _Echo de France_ published the following article in
its evening edition:

“This morning Mon. Thenard, commissary of police in the sixteenth
district, released Herlock Sholmes and his friend Wilson, both of whom
had been locked in the house of the late Baron d’Hautrec, where they
spent a very pleasant night—thanks to the thoughtful care and attention
of Arsène Lupin.”

“In addition to their other troubles, these gentlemen have been robbed
of their valises, and, in consequence thereof, they have entered a
formal complaint against Arsène Lupin.”

“Arsène Lupin, satisfied that he has given them a mild reproof, hopes
these gentlemen will not force him to resort to more stringent
measures.”

“Bah!” exclaimed Herlock Sholmes, crushing the paper in his hands,
“that is only child’s play! And that is the only criticism I have to
make of Arsène Lupin: he plays to the gallery. There is that much of
the fakir in him.”

“Ah! Sholmes, you are a wonderful man! You have such a command over
your temper. Nothing ever disturbs you.”

“No, nothing disturbs me,” replied Sholmes, in a voice that trembled
from rage; “besides, what’s the use of losing my temper?... I am quite
confident of the final result; I shall have the last word.”




CHAPTER IV.
LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS.


However well-tempered a man’s character may be—and Herlock Sholmes is
one of those men over whom ill-fortune has little or no hold—there are
circumstances wherein the most courageous combatant feels the necessity
of marshaling his forces before risking the chances of a battle.

“I shall take a vacation to-day,” said Sholmes.

“And what shall I do?” asked Wilson.

“You, Wilson—let me see! You can buy some underwear and linen to
replenish our wardrobe, while I take a rest.”

“Very well, Sholmes, I will watch while you sleep.”

Wilson uttered these words with all the importance of a sentinel on
guard at the outpost, and therefore exposed to the greatest danger. His
chest was expanded; his muscles were tense. Assuming a shrewd look, he
scrutinized, officially, the little room in which they had fixed their
abode.

“Very well, Wilson, you can watch. I shall occupy myself in the
preparation of a line of attack more appropriate to the methods of the
enemy we are called upon to meet. Do you see, Wilson, we have been
deceived in this fellow Lupin. My opinion is that we must commence at
the very beginning of this affair.”

“And even before that, if possible. But have we sufficient time?”

“Nine days, dear boy. That is five too many.”

The Englishman spent the entire afternoon in smoking and sleeping. He
did not enter upon his new plan of attack until the following day. Then
he said:

“Wilson, I am ready. Let us attack the enemy.”

“Lead on, Macduff!” exclaimed Wilson, full of martial ardor. “I wish to
fight in the front rank. Oh! have no fear. I shall do credit to my King
and country, for I am an Englishman.”

In the first place, Sholmes had three long and important interviews:
With Monsieur Detinan, whose rooms he examined with the greatest care
and precision; with Suzanne Gerbois, whom he questioned in regard to
the blonde Lady; and with Sister Auguste, who had retired to the
convent of the Visitandines since the murder of Baron d’Hautrec.

At each of these interviews Wilson had remained outside; and each time
he asked:

“Satisfactory?”

“Quite so.”

“I was sure we were on the right track.”

They paid a visit to the two houses adjoining that of the late Baron
d’Hautrec in the avenue Henri-Martin; then they visited the rue
Clapeyron, and, while he was examining the front of number 25, Sholmes
said:

“All these houses must be connected by secret passages, but I can’t
find them.”

For the first time in his life, Wilson doubted the omnipotence of his
famous associate. Why did he now talk so much and accomplish so little?

“Why?” exclaimed Sholmes, in answer to Wilson’s secret thought,
“because, with this fellow Lupin, a person has to work in the dark,
and, instead of deducting the truth from established facts, a man must
extract it from his own brain, and afterward learn if it is supported
by the facts in the case.”

“But what about the secret passages?”

“They must exist. But even though I should discover them, and thus
learn how Arsène Lupin made his entrance to the lawyer’s house and how
the blonde Lady escaped from the house of Baron d’Hautrec after the
murder, what good would it do? How would it help me? Would it furnish
me with a weapon of attack?”

“Let us attack him just the same,” exclaimed Wilson, who had scarcely
uttered these words when he jumped back with a cry of alarm. Something
had fallen at their feet; it was a bag filled with sand which might
have caused them serious injury if it had struck them.

Sholmes looked up. Some men were working on a scaffolding attached to
the balcony at the fifth floor of the house. He said:

“We were lucky; one step more, and that heavy bag would have fallen on
our heads. I wonder if—”

Moved by a sudden impulse, he rushed into the house, up the five
flights of stairs, rang the bell, pushed his way into the apartment to
the great surprise and alarm of the servant who came to the door, and
made his way to the balcony in front of the house. But there was no one
there.

“Where are the workmen who were here a moment ago?” he asked the
servant.

“They have just gone.”

“Which way did they go?”

“By the servants’ stairs.”

Sholmes leaned out of the window. He saw two men leaving the house,
carrying bicycles. They mounted them and quickly disappeared around the
corner.

“How long have they been working on this scaffolding?”

“Those men?... only since this morning. It’s their first day.”

Sholmes returned to the street, and joined Wilson. Together they
returned to the hotel, and thus the second day ended in a mournful
silence.

On the following day their programme was almost similar. They sat
together on a bench in the avenue Henri-Martin, much to Wilson’s
disgust, who did not find it amusing to spend long hours watching the
house in which the tragedy had occurred.

“What do you expect, Sholmes? That Arsène Lupin will walk out of the
house?”

“No.”

“That the blonde Lady will make her appearance?”

“No.”

“What then?”

“I am looking for something to occur; some slight incident that will
furnish me with a clue to work on.”

“And if it does not occur?”

“Then I must, myself, create the spark that will set fire to the
powder.”

A solitary incident—and that of a disagreeable nature—broke the
monotony of the forenoon.

A gentleman was riding along the avenue when his horse suddenly turned
aside in such a manner that it ran against the bench on which they were
sitting, and struck Sholmes a slight blow on the shoulder.

“Ha!” exclaimed Sholmes, “a little more and I would have had a broken
shoulder.”

The gentleman struggled with his horse. The Englishman drew his
revolver and pointed it; but Wilson seized his arm, and said:

“Don’t be foolish! What are you going to do? Kill the man?”

“Leave me alone, Wilson! Let go!”

During the brief struggle between Sholmes and Wilson the stranger rode
away.

“Now, you can shoot,” said Wilson, triumphantly, when the horseman was
at some distance.

“Wilson, you’re an idiot! Don’t you understand that the man is an
accomplice of Arsène Lupin?”

Sholmes was trembling from rage. Wilson stammered pitifully:

“What!... that man ... an accomplice?”

“Yes, the same as the workmen who tried to drop the bag of sand on us
yesterday.”

“It can’t be possible!”

“Possible or not, there was only one way to prove it.”

“By killing the man?”

“No—by killing the horse. If you hadn’t grabbed my arm, I should have
captured one of Lupin’s accomplices. Now, do you understand the folly
of your act?”

Throughout the afternoon both men were morose. They did not speak a
word to each other. At five o’clock they visited the rue Clapeyron, but
were careful to keep at a safe distance from the houses. However, three
young men who were passing through the street, arm in arm, singing, ran
against Sholmes and Wilson and refused to let them pass. Sholmes, who
was in an ill humor, contested the right of way with them. After a
brief struggle, Sholmes resorted to his fists. He struck one of the men
a hard blow on the chest, another a blow in the face, and thus subdued
two of his adversaries. Thereupon the three of them took to their heels
and disappeared.

“Ah!” exclaimed Sholmes, “that does me good. I needed a little
exercise.”

But Wilson was leaning against the wall. Sholmes said:

“What’s the matter, old chap? You’re quite pale.”

Wilson pointed to his left arm, which hung inert, and stammered:

“I don’t know what it is. My arm pains me.”

“Very much?... Is it serious?”

“Yes, I am afraid so.”

He tried to raise his arm, but it was helpless. Sholmes felt it, gently
at first, then in a rougher way, “to see how badly it was hurt,” he
said. He concluded that Wilson was really hurt, so he led him to a
neighboring pharmacy, where a closer examination revealed the fact that
the arm was broken and that Wilson was a candidate for the hospital. In
the meantime they bared his arm and applied some remedies to ease his
suffering.

“Come, come, old chap, cheer up!” said Sholmes, who was holding
Wilson’s arm, “in five or six weeks you will be all right again. But I
will pay them back ... the rascals! Especially Lupin, for this is his
work ... no doubt of that. I swear to you if ever——”

He stopped suddenly, dropped the arm—which caused Wilson such an access
of pain that he almost fainted—and, striking his forehead, Sholmes
said:

“Wilson, I have an idea. You know, I have one occasionally.”

He stood for a moment, silent, with staring eyes, and then muttered, in
short, sharp phrases:

“Yes, that’s it ... that will explain all ... right at my feet ... and
I didn’t see it ... ah, parbleu! I should have thought of it before....
Wilson, I shall have good news for you.”

Abruptly leaving his old friend, Sholmes ran into the street and went
directly to the house known as number 25. On one of the stones, to the
right of the door, he read this inscription: “Destange, architect,
1875.”

There was a similar inscription on the house numbered 23.

Of course, there was nothing unusual in that. But what might be read on
the houses in the avenue Henri-Martin?

A carriage was passing. He engaged it and directed the driver to take
him to No. 134 avenue Henri-Martin. He was roused to a high pitch of
excitement. He stood up in the carriage and urged the horse to greater
speed. He offered extra pourboires to the driver. Quicker! Quicker!

How great was his anxiety as they turned from the rue de la Pompe! Had
he caught a glimpse of the truth at last?

On one of the stones of the late Baron’s house he read the words:
“Destange, architect, 1874.” And a similar inscription appeared on the
two adjoining houses.


The reaction was such that he settled down in the seat of the carriage,
trembling from joy. At last, a tiny ray of light had penetrated the
dark shadows which encompassed these mysterious crimes! In the vast
sombre forest wherein a thousand pathways crossed and re-crossed, he
had discovered the first clue to the track followed by the enemy!

He entered a branch postoffice and obtained telephonic connection with
the château de Crozon. The Countess answered the telephone call.

“Hello!... Is that you, madame?”

“Monsieur Sholmes, isn’t it? Everything going all right?”

“Quite well, but I wish to ask you one question.... Hello!”

“Yes, I hear you.”

“Tell me, when was the château de Crozon built?”

“It was destroyed by fire and rebuilt about thirty years ago.”

“Who built it, and in what year?”

“There is an inscription on the front of the house which reads: ‘Lucien
Destange, architect, 1877.’”

“Thank you, madame, that is all. Good-bye.”

He went away, murmuring: “Destange ... Lucien Destange ... that name
has a familiar sound.”

He noticed a public reading-room, entered, consulted a dictionary of
modern biography, and copied the following information: “Lucien
Destange, born 1840, Grand-Prix de Rome, officer of the Legion of
Honor, author of several valuable books on architecture, etc....”

Then he returned to the pharmacy and found that Wilson had been taken
to the hospital. There Sholmes found him with his arm in splints, and
shivering with fever.

“Victory! Victory!” cried Sholmes. “I hold one end of the thread.”

“Of what thread?”

“The one that leads to victory. I shall now be walking on solid ground,
where there will be footprints, clues....”

“Cigarette ashes?” asked Wilson, whose curiosity had overcome his pain.

“And many other things! Just think, Wilson, I have found the mysterious
link which unites the different adventures in which the blonde Lady
played a part. Why did Lupin select those three houses for the scenes
of his exploits?”

“Yes, why?”

“Because those three houses were built by the same architect. That was
an easy problem, eh? Of course ... but who would have thought of it?”

“No one but you.”

“And who, except I, knows that the same architect, by the use of
analogous plans, has rendered it possible for a person to execute three
distinct acts which, though miraculous in appearance, are, in reality,
quite simple and easy?”

“That was a stroke of good luck.”

“And it was time, dear boy, as I was becoming very impatient. You know,
this is our fourth day.”

“Out of ten.”

“Oh! after this——”

Sholmes was excited, delighted, and gayer than usual.

“And when I think that these rascals might have attacked me in the
street and broken my arm just as they did yours! Isn’t that so,
Wilson?”

Wilson simply shivered at the horrible thought. Sholmes continued:

“We must profit by the lesson. I can see, Wilson, that we were wrong to
try and fight Lupin in the open, and leave ourselves exposed to his
attacks.”

“I can see it, and feel it, too, in my broken arm,” said Wilson.

“You have one consolation, Wilson; that is, that I escaped. Now, I must
be doubly cautious. In an open fight he will defeat me; but if I can
work in the dark, unseen by him, I have the advantage, no matter how
strong his forces may be.”

“Ganimard might be of some assistance.”

“Never! On the day that I can truly say: Arsène Lupin is there; I show
you the quarry, and how to catch it; I shall go and see Ganimard at one
of the two addresses that he gave me—his residence in the rue
Pergolese, or at the Suisse tavern in the Place du Châtelet. But, until
that time, I shall work alone.”

He approached the bed, placed his hand on Wilson’s shoulder—on the sore
one, of course—and said to him:

“Take care of yourself, old fellow. Henceforth your rôle will be to
keep two or three of Arsène Lupin’s men busy watching here in vain for
my return to enquire about your health. It is a secret mission for you,
eh?”

“Yes, and I shall do my best to fulfil it conscientiously. Then you do
not expect to come here any more?”

“What for?” asked Sholmes.

“I don’t know ... of course.... I am getting on as well as possible.
But, Herlock, do me a last service: give me a drink.”

“A drink?”

“Yes, I am dying of thirst; and with my fever——”

“To be sure—directly——”

He made a pretense of getting some water, perceived a package of
tobacco, lighted his pipe, and then, as if he had not heard his
friend’s request, he went away, whilst Wilson uttered a mute prayer for
the inaccessible water.


“Monsieur Destange!”

The servant eyed from head to foot the person to whom he had opened the
door of the house—the magnificent house that stood at the corner of the
Place Malesherbes and the rue Montchanin—and at the sight of the man
with gray hairs, badly shaved, dressed in a shabby black coat, with a
body as ill-formed and ungracious as his face, he replied with the
disdain which he thought the occasion warranted:

“Monsieur Destange may or may not be at home. That depends. Has
monsieur a card?”

Monsieur did not have a card, but he had a letter of introduction and,
after the servant had taken the letter to Mon. Destange, he was
conducted into the presence of that gentleman who was sitting in a
large circular room or rotunda which occupied one of the wings of the
house. It was a library, and contained a profusion of books and
architectural drawings. When the stranger entered, the architect said
to him:

“You are Monsieur Stickmann?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“My secretary tells me that he is ill, and has sent you to continue the
general catalogue of the books which he commenced under my direction,
and, more particularly, the catalogue of German books. Are you familiar
with that kind of work?”

“Yes, monsieur, quite so,” he replied, with a strong German accent.

Under those circumstances the bargain was soon concluded, and Mon.
Destange commenced work with his new secretary.

Herlock Sholmes had gained access to the house.

In order to escape the vigilance of Arsène Lupin and gain admittance to
the house occupied by Lucien Destange and his daughter Clotilde, the
famous detective had been compelled to resort to a number of
stratagems, and, under a variety of names, to ingratiate himself into
the good graces and confidence of a number of persons—in short, to
live, during forty-eight hours, a most complicated life. During that
time he had acquired the following information: Mon. Destange, having
retired from active business on account of his failing health, now
lived amongst the many books he had accumulated on the subject of
architecture. He derived infinite pleasure in viewing and handling
those dusty old volumes.

His daughter Clotilde was considered eccentric. She passed her time in
another part of the house, and never went out.

“Of course,” Sholmes said to himself, as he wrote in a register the
titles of the books which Mon. Destange dictated to him, “all that is
vague and incomplete, but it is quite a long step in advance. I shall
surely solve one of these absorbing problems: Is Mon. Destange
associated with Arsène Lupin? Does he continue to see him? Are the
papers relating to the construction of the three houses still in
existence? Will those papers not furnish me with the location of other
houses of similar construction which Arsène Lupin and his associates
will plunder in the future?

“Monsieur Destange, an accomplice of Arsène Lupin! That venerable man,
an officer of the Legion of Honor, working in league with a
burglar—such an idea was absurd! Besides, if we concede that such a
complicity exists, how could Mon. Destange, thirty years ago, have
possibly foreseen the thefts of Arsène Lupin, who was then an infant?”

No matter! The Englishman was implacable. With his marvellous scent,
and that instinct which never fails him, he felt that he was in the
heart of some strange mystery. Ever since he first entered the house,
he had been under the influence of that impression, and yet he could
not define the grounds on which he based his suspicions.

Up to the morning of the second day he had not made any significant
discovery. At two o’clock of that day he saw Clotilde Destange for the
first time; she came to the library in search of a book. She was about
thirty years of age, a brunette, slow and silent in her movements, with
features imbued with that expression of indifference which is
characteristic of people who live a secluded life. She exchanged a few
words with her father, and then retired, without even looking at
Sholmes.

The afternoon dragged along monotonously. At five o’clock Mon. Destange
announced his intention to go out. Sholmes was alone on the circular
gallery that was constructed about ten feet above the floor of the
rotunda. It was almost dark. He was on the point of going out, when he
heard a slight sound and, at the same time, experienced the feeling
that there was someone in the room. Several minutes passed before he
saw or heard anything more. Then he shuddered; a shadowy form emerged
from the gloom, quite close to him, upon the balcony. It seemed
incredible. How long had this mysterious visitor been there? Whence did
he come?

The strange man descended the steps and went directly to a large oaken
cupboard. Sholmes was a keen observer of the man’s movements. He
watched him searching amongst the papers with which the cupboard was
filled. What was he looking for?

Then the door opened and Mlle. Destange entered, speaking to someone
who was following her:

“So you have decided not to go out, father?... Then I will make a light
... one second ... do not move....”

The strange man closed the cupboard and hid in the embrasure of a large
window, drawing the curtains together. Did Mlle. Destange not see him?
Did she not hear him? Calmly she turned on the electric lights; she and
her father sat down close to each other. She opened a book she had
brought with her, and commenced to read. After the lapse of a few
minutes she said:

“Your secretary has gone.”

“Yes, I don’t see him.”

“Do you like him as well as you did at first?” she asked, as if she
were not aware of the illness of the real secretary and his replacement
by Stickmann.

“Oh! yes.”

Monsieur Destange’s head bobbed from one side to the other. He was
asleep. The girl resumed her reading. A moment later one of the window
curtains was pushed back, and the strange man emerged and glided along
the wall toward the door, which obliged him to pass behind Mon.
Destange but in front of Clotilde, and brought him into the light so
that Herlock Sholmes obtained a good view of the man’s face. It was
Arsène Lupin.

The Englishman was delighted. His forecast was verified; he had
penetrated to the very heart of the mystery, and found Arsène Lupin to
be the moving spirit in it.

Clotilde had not yet displayed any knowledge of his presence, although
it was quite improbable that any movement of the intruder had escaped
her notice. Lupin had almost reached the door and, in fact, his hand
was already seeking the door-knob, when his coat brushed against a
small table and knocked something to the floor. Monsieur Destange awoke
with a start. Arsène Lupin was already standing in front of him, hat in
hand, smiling.

“Maxime Bermond,” exclaimed Mon. Destange, joyfully. “My dear Maxime,
what lucky chance brings you here?”

“The wish to see you and Mademoiselle Destange.”

“When did you return from your journey?”

“Yesterday.”

“You must stay to dinner.”

“No, thank you, I am sorry, but I have an appointment to dine with some
friends at a restaurant.”

“Come, to-morrow, then, Clotilde, you must urge him to come to-morrow.
Ah! my dear Maxime.... I thought of you many times during your
absence.”

“Really?”

“Yes, I went through all my old papers in that cupboard, and found our
last statement of account.”

“What account?”

“Relating to the avenue Henri-Martin.”

“Ah! do you keep such papers? What for?”

Then the three of them left the room, and continued their conversation
in a small parlor which adjoined the library.

“Is it Lupin?” Sholmes asked himself, in a sudden access of doubt.
Certainly, from all appearances, it was he; and yet it was also someone
else who resembled Arsène Lupin in certain respects, and who still
maintained his own individuality, features, and color of hair. Sholmes
could hear Lupin’s voice in the adjoining room. He was relating some
stories at which Mon. Destange laughed heartily, and which even brought
a smile to the lips of the melancholy Clotilde. And each of those
smiles appeared to be the reward which Arsène Lupin was seeking, and
which he was delighted to have secured. His success caused him to
redouble his efforts and, insensibly, at the sound of that clear and
happy voice, Clotilde’s face brightened and lost that cold and listless
expression which usually pervaded it.

“They love each other,” thought Sholmes, “but what the deuce can there
be in common between Clotilde Destange and Maxime Bermond? Does she
know that Maxime is none other than Arsène Lupin?”

Until seven o’clock Sholmes was an anxious listener, seeking to profit
by the conversation. Then, with infinite precaution, he descended from
the gallery, crept along the side of the room to the door in such a
manner that the people in the adjoining room did not see him.

When he reached the street Sholmes satisfied himself that there was
neither an automobile nor a cab waiting there; then he slowly limped
along the boulevard Malesherbes. He turned into an adjacent street,
donned the overcoat which he had carried on his arm, altered the shape
of his hat, assumed an upright carriage, and, thus transformed,
returned to a place whence he could watch the door of Mon. Destange’s
house.

In a few minutes Arsène Lupin came out, and proceeded to walk toward
the center of Paris by way of the rues de Constantinople and London.
Herlock Sholmes followed at a distance of a hundred paces.

Exciting moments for the Englishman! He sniffed the air, eagerly, like
a hound following a fresh scent. It seemed to him a delightful thing
thus to follow his adversary. It was no longer Herlock Sholmes who was
being watched, but Arsène Lupin, the invisible Arsène Lupin. He held
him, so to speak, within the grasp of his eye, by an imperceptible bond
that nothing could break. And he was pleased to think that the quarry
belonged to him.

But he soon observed a suspicious circumstance. In the intervening
space between him and Arsène Lupin he noticed several people traveling
in the same direction, particularly two husky fellows in slouch hats on
the left side of the street, and two others on the right wearing caps
and smoking cigarettes. Of course, their presence in that vicinity may
have been the result of chance, but Sholmes was more astonished when he
observed that the four men stopped when Lupin entered a tobacco shop;
and still more surprised when the four men started again after Lupin
emerged from the shop, each keeping to his own side of the street.

“Curse it!” muttered Sholmes; “he is being followed.”

He was annoyed at the idea that others were on the trail of Arsène
Lupin; that someone might deprive him, not of the glory—he cared little
for that—but of the immense pleasure of capturing, single-handed, the
most formidable enemy he had ever met. And he felt that he was not
mistaken; the men presented to Sholmes’ experienced eye the appearance
and manner of those who, while regulating their gait to that of
another, wish to present a careless and natural air.

“Is this some of Ganimard’s work?” muttered Sholmes. “Is he playing me
false?”

He felt inclined to speak to one of the men with a view of acting in
concert with him; but as they were now approaching the boulevard the
crowd was becoming denser, and he was afraid he might lose sight of
Lupin. So he quickened his pace and turned into the boulevard just in
time to see Lupin ascending the steps of the Hungarian restaurant at
the corner of the rue du Helder. The door of the restaurant was open,
so that Sholmes, while sitting on a bench on the other side of the
boulevard, could see Lupin take a seat at a table, luxuriously
appointed and decorated with flowers, at which three gentlemen and two
ladies of elegant appearance were already seated and who extended to
Lupin a hearty greeting.

Sholmes now looked about for the four men and perceived them amongst a
crowd of people who were listening to a gipsy orchestra that was
playing in a neighboring café. It was a curious thing that they were
paying no attention to Arsène Lupin, but seemed to be friendly with the
people around them. One of them took a cigarette from his pocket and
approached a gentleman who wore a frock coat and silk hat. The
gentleman offered the other his cigar for a light, and Sholmes had the
impression that they talked to each other much longer than the occasion
demanded. Finally the gentleman approached the Hungarian restaurant,
entered and looked around. When he caught sight of Lupin he advanced
and spoke to him for a moment, then took a seat at an adjoining table.
Sholmes now recognized this gentleman as the horseman who had tried to
run him down in the avenue Henri-Martin.

Then Sholmes understood that these men were not tracking Arsène Lupin;
they were a part of his band. They were watching over his safety. They
were his bodyguard, his satellites, his vigilant escort. Wherever
danger threatened Lupin, these confederates were at hand to avert it,
ready to defend him. The four men were accomplices. The gentleman in
the frock coat was an accomplice. These facts furnished the Englishman
with food for reflection. Would he ever succeed in capturing that
inaccessible individual? What unlimited power was possessed by such an
organization, directed by such a chief!

He tore a leaf from his notebook, wrote a few lines in pencil, which he
placed in an envelope, and said to a boy about fifteen years of age who
was sitting on the bench beside him:

“Here, my boy; take a carriage and deliver this letter to the cashier
of the Suisse tavern, Place du Châtelet. Be quick!”

He gave him a five-franc piece. The boy disappeared.

A half hour passed away. The crowd had grown larger, and Sholmes
perceived only at intervals the accomplices of Arsène Lupin. Then
someone brushed against him and whispered in his ear:

“Well? what is it, Monsieur Sholmes?”

“Ah! it is you, Ganimard?”

“Yes; I received your note at the tavern. What’s the matter?”

“He is there.”

“What do you mean?”

“There ... in the restaurant. Lean to the right.... Do you see him
now?”

“No.”

“He is pouring a glass of champagne for the lady.”

“That is not Lupin.”

“Yes, it is.”

“But I tell you.... Ah! yet, it may be. It looks a great deal like
him,” said Ganimard, naively. “And the others—accomplices?”

“No; the lady sitting beside him is Lady Cliveden; the other is the
Duchess de Cleath. The gentleman sitting opposite Lupin is the Spanish
Ambassador to London.”

Ganimard took a step forward. Sholmes retained him.

“Be prudent. You are alone.”

“So is he.”

“No, he has a number of men on the boulevard mounting guard. And inside
the restaurant that gentleman——”

“And I, when I take Arsène Lupin by the collar and announce his name, I
shall have the entire room on my side and all the waiters.”

“I should prefer to have a few policemen.”

“But, Monsieur Sholmes, we have no choice. We must catch him when we
can.”

He was right; Sholmes knew it. It was better to take advantage of the
opportunity and make the attempt. Sholmes simply gave this advice to
Ganimard:

“Conceal your identity as long as possible.”

Sholmes glided behind a newspaper kiosk, whence he could still watch
Lupin, who was leaning toward Lady Cliveden, talking and smiling.

Ganimard crossed the street, hands in his pockets, as if he were going
down the boulevard, but when he reached the opposite sidewalk he turned
quickly and bounded up the steps of the restaurant. There was a shrill
whistle. Ganimard ran against the head waiter, who had suddenly planted
himself in the doorway and now pushed Ganimard back with a show of
indignation, as if he were an intruder whose presence would bring
disgrace upon the restaurant. Ganimard was surprised. At the same
moment the gentleman in the frock coat came out. He took the part of
the detective and entered into an exciting argument with the waiter;
both of them hung on to Ganimard, one pushing him in, the other pushing
him out in such a manner that, despite all his efforts and despite his
furious protestations, the unfortunate detective soon found himself on
the sidewalk.

The struggling men were surrounded by a crowd. Two policemen, attracted
by the noise, tried to force their way through the crowd, but
encountered a mysterious resistance and could make no headway through
the opposing backs and pressing shoulders of the mob.

But suddenly, as if by magic, the crowd parted and the passage to the
restaurant was clear. The head waiter, recognizing his mistake, was
profuse in his apologies; the gentleman in the frock coat ceased his
efforts on behalf of the detective, the crowd dispersed, the policemen
passed on, and Ganimard hastened to the table at which the six guests
were sitting. But now there were only five! He looked around.... The
only exit was the door.

“The person who was sitting here!” he cried to the five astonished
guests. “Where is he?”

“Monsieur Destro?”

“No; Arsène Lupin!”

A waiter approached and said:

“The gentleman went upstairs.”

Ganimard rushed up in the hope of finding him. The upper floor of the
restaurant contained private dining-rooms and had a private stairway
leading to the boulevard.

“No use looking for him now,” muttered Ganimard. “He is far away by
this time.”


He was not far away—two hundred yards at most—in the Madeleine-Bastille
omnibus, which was rolling along very peacefully with its three horses
across the Place de l’Opéra toward the Boulevard des Capucines. Two
sturdy fellows were talking together on the platform. On the roof of
the omnibus near the stairs an old fellow was sleeping; it was Herlock
Sholmes.

With bobbing head, rocked by the movement of the vehicle, the
Englishman said to himself:

“If Wilson could see me now, how proud he would be of his
collaborator!... Bah! It was easy to foresee that the game was lost, as
soon as the man whistled; nothing could be done but watch the exits and
see that our man did not escape. Really, Lupin makes life exciting and
interesting.”

At the terminal point Herlock Sholmes, by leaning over, saw Arsène
Lupin leaving the omnibus, and as he passed in front of the men who
formed his bodyguard Sholmes heard him say: “A l’Etoile.”

“A l’Etoile, exactly, a rendezvous. I shall be there,” thought Sholmes.
“I will follow the two men.”

Lupin took an automobile; but the men walked the entire distance,
followed by Sholmes. They stopped at a narrow house, No. 40 rue
Chalgrin, and rang the bell. Sholmes took his position in the shadow of
a doorway, whence he could watch the house in question. A man opened
one of the windows of the ground floor and closed the shutters. But the
shutters did not reach to the top of the window. The impost was clear.

At the end of ten minutes a gentleman rang at the same door and a few
minutes later another man came. A short time afterward an automobile
stopped in front of the house, bringing two passengers: Arsène Lupin
and a lady concealed beneath a large cloak and a thick veil.

“The blonde Lady, no doubt,” said Sholmes to himself, as the automobile
drove away.

Herlock Sholmes now approached the house, climbed to the window-ledge
and, by standing on tiptoe, he was able to see through the window above
the shutters. What did he see?

Arsène Lupin, leaning against the mantel, was speaking with
considerable animation. The others were grouped around him, listening
to him attentively. Amongst them Sholmes easily recognized the
gentleman in the frock coat and he thought one of the other men
resembled the head-waiter of the restaurant. As to the blonde Lady, she
was seated in an armchair with her back to the window.

“They are holding a consultation,” thought Sholmes. “They are worried
over the incident at the restaurant and are holding a council of war.
Ah! what a master stroke it would be to capture all of them at one fell
stroke!”

One of them, having moved toward the door, Sholmes leaped to the ground
and concealed himself in the shadow. The gentleman in the frock coat
and the head-waiter left the house. A moment later a light appeared at
the windows of the first floor, but the shutters were closed
immediately and the upper part of the house was dark as well as the
lower.

“Lupin and the woman are on the ground floor; the two confederates live
on the upper floor,” said Sholmes.

Sholmes remained there the greater part of the night, fearing that if
he went away Arsène Lupin might leave during his absence. At four
o’clock, seeing two policemen at the end of the street, he approached
them, explained the situation and left them to watch the house. He went
to Ganimard’s residence in the rue Pergolese and wakened him.

“I have him yet,” said Sholmes.

“Arsène Lupin?”

“Yes.”

“If you haven’t got any better hold on him than you had a while ago, I
might as well go back to bed. But we may as well go to the
station-house.”

They went to the police station in the rue Mesnil and from there to the
residence of the commissary, Mon. Decointre. Then, accompanied by half
a dozen policemen, they went to the rue Chalgrin.

“Anything new?” asked Sholmes, addressing the two policemen.

“Nothing.”

It was just breaking day when, after taking necessary measures to
prevent escape, the commissary rang the bell and commenced to question
the concierge. The woman was greatly frightened at this early morning
invasion, and she trembled as she replied that there were no tenants on
the ground floor.

“What! not a tenant?” exclaimed Ganimard.

“No; but on the first floor there are two men named Leroux. They have
furnished the apartment on the ground floor for some country
relations.”

“A gentleman and lady.”

“Yes.”

“Who came here last night.”

“Perhaps ... but I don’t know ... I was asleep. But I don’t think so,
for the key is here. They did not ask for it.”

With that key the commissary opened the door of the ground-floor
apartment. It comprised only two rooms and they were empty.

“Impossible!” exclaimed Sholmes. “I saw both of them in this room.”

“I don’t doubt your word,” said the commissary; “but they are not here
now.”

“Let us go to the first floor. They must be there.”

“The first floor is occupied by two men named Leroux.”

“We will examine the Messieurs Leroux.”

They all ascended the stairs and the commissary rang. At the second
ring a man opened the door; he was in his shirt-sleeves. Sholmes
recognized him as one of Lupin’s bodyguard. The man assumed a furious
air:

“What do you mean by making such a row at this hour of the morning ...
waking people up....”

But he stopped suddenly, astounded.

“God forgive me!... really, gentlemen, I didn’t notice who it was. Why,
it is Monsieur Decointre!... and you, Monsieur Ganimard. What can I do
for you!”

Ganimard burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter, which caused him
to bend double and turn black in the face.

“Ah! it is you, Leroux,” he stammered. “Oh! this is too funny! Leroux,
an accomplice of Arsène Lupin! Oh, I shall die! and your brother,
Leroux, where is he?”

“Edmond!” called the man. “It is Ganimard, who has come to visit us.”

Another man appeared and at sight of him Ganimard’s mirth redoubled.

“Oh! oh! we had no idea of this! Ah! my friends, you are in a bad fix
now. Who would have ever suspected it?”

Turning to Sholmes, Ganimard introduced the man:

“Victor Leroux, a detective from our office, one of the best men in the
iron brigade ... Edmond Leroux, chief clerk in the anthropometric
service.”




CHAPTER V.
AN ABDUCTION.


Herlock Sholmes said nothing. To protest? To accuse the two men? That
would be useless. In the absence of evidence which he did not possess
and had no time to seek, no one would believe him. Moreover, he was
stifled with rage, but would not display his feelings before the
triumphant Ganimard. So he bowed respectfully to the brothers Leroux,
guardians of society, and retired.

In the vestibule he turned toward a low door which looked like the
entrance to a cellar, and picked up a small red stone; it was a garnet.
When he reached the street he turned and read on the front of the house
this inscription: “Lucien Destange, architect, 1877.”

The adjoining house, No. 42, bore the same inscription.

“Always the double passage—numbers 40 and 42 have a secret means of
communication. Why didn’t I think of that? I should have remained with
the two policemen.”

He met the policemen near the corner and said to them:

“Two people came out of house No. 42 during my absence, didn’t they?”

“Yes; a gentleman and lady.”

Ganimard approached. Sholmes took his arm, and as they walked down the
street he said:

“Monsieur Ganimard, you have had a good laugh and will no doubt forgive
me for the trouble I have caused you.”

“Oh! there’s no harm done; but it was a good joke.”

“I admit that; but the best jokes have only a short life, and this one
can’t last much longer.”

“I hope not.”

“This is now the seventh day, and I can remain only three days more.
Then I must return to London.”

“Oh!”

“I wish to ask you to be in readiness, as I may call on you at any hour
on Tuesday or Wednesday night.”

“For an expedition of the same kind as we had to-night?”

“Yes, monsieur, the very same.”

“With what result?”

“The capture of Arsène Lupin,” replied Sholmes.

“Do you think so?”

“I swear it, on my honor, monsieur.”

Sholmes bade Ganimard good-bye and went to the nearest hotel for a few
hours’ sleep; after which, refreshed and with renewed confidence in
himself, he returned to the rue Chalgrin, slipped two louis into the
hand of the concierge, assured himself that the brothers Leroux had
gone out, learned that the house belonged to a Monsieur Harmingeat,
and, provided with a candle, descended to the cellar through the low
door near which he had found the garnet. At the bottom of the stairs he
found another exactly like it.

“I am not mistaken,” he thought; “this is the means of communication.
Let me see if my skeleton-key will open the cellar reserved for the
tenant of the ground floor. Yes; it will. Now, I will examine those
cases of wine... oh! oh! here are some places where the dust has been
cleared away ... and some footprints on the ground....”

A slight noise caused him to listen attentively. Quickly he pushed the
door shut, blew out his candle and hid behind a pile of empty wine
cases. After a few seconds he noticed that a portion of the wall swung
on a pivot, the light of a lantern was thrown into the cellar, an arm
appeared, then a man entered.

He was bent over, as if he were searching for something. He felt in the
dust with his fingers and several times he threw something into a
cardboard box that he carried in his left hand. Afterward he
obliterated the traces of his footsteps, as well as the footprints left
by Lupin and the blonde lady, and he was about to leave the cellar by
the same way as he had entered, when he uttered a harsh cry and fell to
the ground. Sholmes had leaped upon him. It was the work of a moment,
and in the simplest manner in the world the man found himself stretched
on the ground, bound and handcuffed. The Englishman leaned over him and
said:

“Have you anything to say?... To tell what you know?”

The man replied by such an ironical smile that Sholmes realized the
futility of questioning him. So he contented himself by exploring the
pockets of his captive, but he found only a bunch of keys, a
handkerchief and the small cardboard box which contained a dozen
garnets similar to those which Sholmes had found.

Then what was he to do with the man? Wait until his friends came to his
help and deliver all of them to the police? What good would that do?
What advantage would that give him over Lupin?

He hesitated; but an examination of the box decided the question. The
box bore this name and address: “Leonard, jeweler, rue de la Paix.”

He resolved to abandon the man to his fate. He locked the cellar and
left the house. At a branch postoffice he sent a telegram to Monsieur
Destange, saying that he could not come that day. Then he went to see
the jeweler and, handing him the garnets, said:

“Madame sent me with these stones. She wishes to have them reset.”

Sholmes had struck the right key. The jeweler replied:

“Certainly; the lady telephoned to me. She said she would be here
to-day.”

Sholmes established himself on the sidewalk to wait for the lady, but
it was five o’clock when he saw a heavily-veiled lady approach and
enter the store. Through the window he saw her place on the counter a
piece of antique jewelry set with garnets.

She went away almost immediately, walking quickly and passed through
streets that were unknown to the Englishman. As it was now almost dark,
he walked close behind her and followed her into a five-story house of
double flats and, therefore, occupied by numerous tenants. At the
second floor she stopped and entered. Two minutes later the Englishman
commenced to try the keys on the bunch he had taken from the man in the
rue Chalgrin. The fourth key fitted the lock.

Notwithstanding the darkness of the rooms, he perceived that they were
absolutely empty, as if unoccupied, and the various doors were standing
open so that he could see all the apartments. At the end of a corridor
he perceived a ray of light and, by approaching on tiptoe and looking
through the glass door, he saw the veiled lady who had removed her hat
and dress and was now wearing a velvet dressing-gown. The discarded
garments were lying on the only chair in the room and a lighted lamp
stood on the mantel.

Then he saw her approach the fireplace and press what appeared to be
the button of an electric bell. Immediately the panel to the right of
the fireplace moved and slowly glided behind the adjoining panel, thus
disclosing an opening large enough for a person to pass through. The
lady disappeared through this opening, taking the lamp with her.

The operation was a very simple one. Sholmes adopted it and followed
the lady. He found himself in total darkness and immediately he felt
his face brushed by some soft articles. He lighted a match and found
that he was in a very small room completely filled with cloaks and
dresses suspended on hangers. He picked his way through until he
reached a door that was draped with a portiere. He peeped through and,
behold, the blonde lady was there, under his eyes, and almost within
reach of his hand.

She extinguished the lamp and turned on the electric lights. Then for
the first time Herlock Sholmes obtained a good look at her face. He was
amazed. The woman, whom he had overtaken after so much trouble and
after so many tricks and manœuvres, was none other than Clotilde
Destange.


Clotilde Destange, the assassin of the Baron d’Hautrec and the thief
who stole the blue diamond! Clotilde Destange, the mysterious friend of
Arsène Lupin! And the blonde lady!

“Yes, I am only a stupid ass,” thought Herlock Sholmes at that moment.
“Because Lupin’s friend was a blonde and Clotilde is a brunette, I
never dreamed that they were the same person. But how could the blonde
lady remain a blonde after the murder of the baron and the theft of the
diamond?”

Sholmes could see a portion of the room; it was a boudoir, furnished
with the most delightful luxury and exquisite taste, and adorned with
beautiful tapestries and costly ornaments. A mahogany couch,
upholstered in silk, was located on the side of the room opposite the
door at which Sholmes was standing. Clotilde was sitting on this couch,
motionless, her face covered by her hands. Then he perceived that she
was weeping. Great tears rolled down her pale cheeks and fell, drop by
drop, on the velvet corsage. The tears came thick and fast, as if their
source were inexhaustible.

A door silently opened behind her and Arsène Lupin entered. He looked
at her for a long time without making his presence known; then he
approached her, knelt at her feet, pressed her head to his breast,
folded her in his arms, and his actions indicated an infinite measure
of love and sympathy. For a time not a word was uttered, but her tears
became less abundant.

“I was so anxious to make you happy,” he murmured.

“I am happy.”

“No; you are crying.... Your tears break my heart, Clotilde.”

The caressing and sympathetic tone of his voice soothed her, and she
listened to him with an eager desire for hope and happiness. Her
features were softened by a smile, and yet how sad a smile! He
continued to speak in a tone of tender entreaty:

“You should not be unhappy, Clotilde; you have no cause to be.”

She displayed her delicate white hands and said, solemnly:

“Yes, Maxime; so long as I see those hands I shall be sad.”

“Why?”

“They are stained with blood.”

“Hush! Do not think of that!” exclaimed Lupin. “The dead is past and
gone. Do not resurrect it.”

And he kissed the long, delicate hand, while she regarded him with a
brighter smile as if each kiss effaced a portion of that dreadful
memory.

“You must love me, Maxime; you must—because no woman will ever love you
as I do. For your sake, I have done many things, not at your order or
request, but in obedience to your secret desires. I have done things at
which my will and conscience revolted, but there was some unknown power
that I could not resist. What I did I did involuntarily, mechanically,
because it helped you, because you wished it ... and I am ready to do
it again to-morrow ... and always.”

“Ah, Clotilde,” he said, bitterly, “why did I draw you into my
adventurous life? I should have remained the Maxime Bermond that you
loved five years ago, and not have let you know the ... other man that
I am.”

She replied in a low voice:

“I love the other man, also, and I have nothing to regret.”

“Yes, you regret your past life—the free and happy life you once
enjoyed.”

“I have no regrets when you are here,” she said, passionately. “All
faults and crimes disappear when I see you. When you are away I may
suffer, and weep, and be horrified at what I have done; but when you
come it is all forgotten. Your love wipes it all away. And I am happy
again.... But you must love me!”

“I do not love you on compulsion, Clotilde. I love you simply because
... I love you.”

“Are you sure of it?”

“I am just as sure of my own love as I am of yours. Only my life is a
very active and exciting one, and I cannot spend as much time with you
as I would like—just now.”

“What is it? Some new danger? Tell me!”

“Oh! nothing serious. Only....”

“Only what?” she asked.

“Well, he is on our track.”

“Who? Herlock Sholmes?”

“Yes; it was he who dragged Ganimard into that affair at the Hungarian
restaurant. It was he who instructed the two policemen to watch the
house in the rue Chalgrin. I have proof of it. Ganimard searched the
house this morning and Sholmes was with him. Besides——”

“Besides? What?”

“Well, there is another thing. One of our men is missing.”

“Who?”

“Jeanniot.”

“The concierge?”

“Yes.”

“Why, I sent him to the rue Chalgrin this morning to pick up the
garnets that fell out of my brooch.”

“There is no doubt, then, that Sholmes caught him.”

“No; the garnets were delivered to the jeweler in the rue de la Paix.”

“Then, what has become of him?”

“Oh! Maxime, I am afraid.”

“There is nothing to be afraid of, but I confess the situation is very
serious. What does he know? Where does he hide himself? His isolation
is his strong card. I cannot reach him.”

“What are you going to do?”

“Act with extreme prudence, Clotilde. Some time ago I decided to change
my residence to a safer place, and Sholmes’ appearance on the scene has
prompted me to do so at once. When a man like that is on your track,
you must be prepared for the worst. Well, I am making my preparations.
Day after to-morrow, Wednesday, I shall move. At noon it will be
finished. At two o’clock I shall leave the place, after removing the
last trace of our residence there, which will be no small matter. Until
then——”

“Well?”

“Until then we must not see each other and no one must see you,
Clotilde. Do not go out. I have no fear for myself, but I have for
you.”

“That Englishman cannot possibly reach me.”

“I am not so sure of that. He is a dangerous man. Yesterday I came here
to search the cupboard that contains all of Monsieur Destange’s old
papers and records. There is danger there. There is danger everywhere.
I feel that he is watching us—that he is drawing his net around us
closer and closer. It is one of those intuitions which never deceive
me.”

“In that case, Maxime, go, and think no more of my tears. I shall be
brave, and wait patiently until the danger is past. Adieu, Maxime.”

They held one another for some time in a last fond embrace. And it was
she that gently pushed him outside. Sholmes could hear the sound of
their voices in the distance.

Emboldened by the necessities of the situation and the urgent need of
bringing his investigation to a speedy termination, Sholmes proceeded
to make an examination of the house in which he now found himself. He
passed through Clotilde’s boudoir into a corridor, at the end of which
there was a stairway leading to the lower floor; he was about to
descend this stairway when he heard voices below, which caused him to
change his route. He followed the corridor, which was a circular one,
and discovered another stairway, which he descended and found himself
amidst surroundings that bore a familiar appearance. He passed through
a door that stood partly open and entered a large circular room. It was
Monsieur Destange’s library.

“Ah! splendid!” he exclaimed. “Now I understand everything. The boudoir
of Mademoiselle Clotilde—the blonde Lady—communicates with a room in
the adjoining house, and that house does not front on the Place
Malesherbes, but upon an adjacent street, the rue Montchanin, if I
remember the name correctly.... And I now understand how Clotilde
Destange can meet her lover and at the same time create the impression
that she never leaves the house; and I understand also how Arsène Lupin
was enabled to make his mysterious entrance to the gallery last night.
Ah! there must be another connection between the library and the
adjoining room. One more house full of ways that are dark! And no doubt
Lucien Destange was the architect, as usual!... I should take advantage
of this opportunity to examine the contents of the cupboard and perhaps
learn the location of other houses with secret passages constructed by
Monsieur Destange.”

Sholmes ascended to the gallery and concealed himself behind some
draperies, where he remained until late in the evening. At last a
servant came and turned off the electric lights. An hour later the
Englishman, by the light of his lantern, made his way to the cupboard.
As he had surmised, it contained the architect’s old papers, plans,
specifications and books of account. It also contained a series of
registers, arranged according to date, and Sholmes, having selected
those of the most recent dates, searched in the indexes for the name
“Harmingeat.” He found it in one of the registers with a reference to
page 63. Turning to that page, he read:

“Harmingeat, 40 rue Chalgrin.”

This was followed by a detailed account of the work done in and about
the installation of a furnace in the house. And in the margin of the
book someone had written these words: “See account M.B.”

“Ah! I thought so!” said Sholmes; “the account M.B. is the one I want.
I shall learn from it the actual residence of Monsieur Lupin.”

It was morning before he found that important account. It comprised
sixteen pages, one of which was a copy of the page on which was
described the work done for Mon. Harmingeat of the rue Chalgrin.
Another page described the work performed for Mon. Vatinel as owner of
the house at No. 25 rue Clapeyron. Another page was reserved for the
Baron d’Hautrec, 134 avenue Henri-Martin; another was devoted to the
Château de Crozon, and the eleven other pages to various owners of
houses in Paris.

Sholmes made a list of those eleven names and addresses; after which he
returned the books to their proper places, opened a window, jumped out
onto the deserted street and closed the shutters behind him.

When he reached his room at the hotel he lighted his pipe with all the
solemnity with which he was wont to characterize that act, and amidst
clouds of smoke he studied the deductions that might be drawn from the
account of M.B., or rather, from the account of Maxime Bermond alias
Arsène Lupin.

At eight o’clock he sent the following message to Ganimard:

“I expect to pass through the rue Pergolese this forenoon and will
inform you of a person whose arrest is of the highest importance. In
any event, be at home to-night and to-morrow until noon and have at
least thirty men at your service.”


Then he engaged an automobile at the stand on the boulevard, choosing
one whose chauffeur looked good-natured but dull-witted, and instructed
him to drive to the Place Malesherbes, where he stopped him about one
hundred feet from Monsieur Destange’s house.

“My boy, close your carriage,” he said to the chauffeur; “turn up the
collar of your coat, for the wind is cold, and wait patiently. At the
end of an hour and a half, crank up your machine. When I return we will
go to the rue Pergolese.”

As he was ascending the steps leading to the door a doubt entered his
mind. Was it not a mistake on his part to be spending his time on the
affairs of the blonde Lady, while Arsène Lupin was preparing to move?
Would he not be better engaged in trying to find the abode of his
adversary amongst the eleven houses on his list?

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “when the blonde Lady becomes my prisoner, I shall
be master of the situation.”

And he rang the bell.


Monsieur Destange was already in the library. They had been working
only a few minutes, when Clotilde entered, bade her father good
morning, entered the adjoining parlor and sat down to write. From his
place Sholmes could see her leaning over the table and from time to
time absorbed in deep meditation. After a short time he picked up a
book and said to Monsieur Destange:

“Here is a book that Mademoiselle Destange asked me to bring to her
when I found it.”

He went into the little parlor, stood before Clotilde in such a manner
that her father could not see her, and said:

“I am Monsieur Stickmann, your father’s new secretary.”

“Ah!” said Clotilde, without moving, “my father has changed his
secretary? I didn’t know it.”

“Yes, mademoiselle, and I desire to speak with you.”

“Kindly take a seat, monsieur; I have finished.”

She added a few words to her letter, signed it, enclosed it in the
envelope, sealed it, pushed her writing material away, rang the
telephone, got in communication with her dressmaker, asked the latter
to hasten the completion of a traveling dress, as she required it at
once, and then, turning to Sholmes, she said:

“I am at your service, monsieur. But do you wish to speak before my
father? Would not that be better?”

“No, mademoiselle; and I beg of you, do not raise your voice. It is
better that Monsieur Destange should not hear us.”

“For whose sake is it better?”

“Yours, mademoiselle.”

“I cannot agree to hold any conversation with you that my father may
not hear.”

“But you must agree to this. It is imperative.”

Both of them arose, eye to eye. She said:

“Speak, monsieur.”

Still standing, he commenced:

“You will be so good as to pardon me if I am mistaken on certain points
of secondary importance. I will guarantee, however, the general
accuracy of my statements.”

“Can we not dispense with these preliminaries, monsieur? Or are they
necessary?”

Sholmes felt the young woman was on her guard, so he replied:

“Very well; I will come to the point. Five years ago your father made
the acquaintance of a certain young man called Maxime Bermond, who was
introduced as a contractor or an architect, I am not sure which it was;
but it was one or the other. Monsieur Destange took a liking to the
young man, and as the state of his health compelled him to retire from
active business, he entrusted to Monsieur Bermond the execution of
certain orders he had received from some of his old customers and which
seemed to come within the scope of Monsieur Bermond’s ability.”

Herlock Sholmes stopped. It seemed to him that the girl’s pallor had
increased. Yet there was not the slightest tremor in her voice when she
said:

“I know nothing about the circumstances to which you refer, monsieur,
and I do not see in what way they can interest me.”

“In this way, mademoiselle: You know, as well as I, that Maxime Bermond
is also known by the name of Arsène Lupin.”

She laughed, and said:

“Nonsense! Arsène Lupin? Maxime Bermond is Arsène Lupin? Oh! no! It
isn’t possible!”

“I have the honor to inform you of that fact, and since you refuse to
understand my meaning, I will add that Arsène Lupin has found in this
house a friend—more than a friend—and accomplice, blindly and
passionately devoted to him.”

Without emotion, or at least with so little emotion that Sholmes was
astonished at her self-control, she declared:

“I do not understand your object, monsieur, and I do not care to; but I
command you to say no more and leave this house.”

“I have no intention of forcing my presence on you,” replied Sholmes,
with equal sang-froid, “but I shall not leave this house alone.”

“And who will accompany you, monsieur?”

“You will.”

“I?”

“Yes, mademoiselle, we will leave this house together, and you will
follow me without one word of protest.”

The strange feature of the foregoing interview was the absolute
coolness of the two adversaries. It bore no resemblance to an
implacable duel between two powerful wills; but, judging solely from
their attitude and the tone of their voices, an onlooker would have
supposed their conversation to be nothing more serious than a courteous
argument over some impersonal subject.

Clotilde resumed her seat without deigning to reply to the last remark
of Herlock Sholmes, except by a shrug of her shoulders. Sholmes looked
at his watch and said:

“It is half-past ten. We will leave here in five minutes.”

“Perhaps.”

“If not, I shall go to Monsieur Destange, and tell him——”

“What?”

“The truth. I will tell him of the vicious life of Maxime Bermond, and
I will tell him of the double life of his accomplice.”

“Of his accomplice?”

“Yes, of the woman known as the blonde Lady, of the woman who was
blonde.”

“What proofs will you give him?”

“I will take him to the rue Chalgrin, and show him the secret passage
made by Arsène Lupin’s workmen,—while doing the work of which he had
the control—between the houses numbered 40 and 42; the passage which
you and he used two nights ago.”

“Well?”

“I will then take Monsieur Destange to the house of Monsieur Detinan;
we will descend the servant’s stairway which was used by you and Arsène
Lupin when you escaped from Ganimard, and we will search together the
means of communication with the adjoining house, which fronts on the
Boulevard des Batignolles, and not upon the rue Clapeyron.”

“Well?”

“I will take Monsieur Destange to the château de Crozon, and it will be
easy for him, who knows the nature of the work performed by Arsène
Lupin in the restoration of the Château, to discover the secret
passages constructed there by his workmen. It will thus be established
that those passages allowed the blonde Lady to make a nocturnal visit
to the Countess’ room and take the blue diamond from the mantel; and,
two weeks later, by similar means, to enter the room of Herr Bleichen
and conceal the blue diamond in his tooth-powder—a strange action, I
confess; a woman’s revenge, perhaps; but I don’t know, and I don’t
care.”

“Well?”

“After that,” said Herlock Sholmes, in a more serious tone, “I will
take Monsieur Destange to 134 avenue Henri-Martin, and we will learn
how the Baron d’Hautrec——”

“No, no, keep quiet,” stammered the girl, struck with a sudden terror,
“I forbid you!... you dare to say that it was I ... you accuse me?...”

“I accuse you of having killed the Baron d’Hautrec.”

“No, no, it is a lie.”

“You killed the Baron d’Hautrec, mademoiselle. You entered his service
under the name of Antoinette Bréhat, for the purpose of stealing the
blue diamond and you killed him.”

“Keep quiet, monsieur,” she implored him. “Since you know so much, you
must know that I did not murder the baron.”

“I did not say that you murdered him, mademoiselle. Baron d’Hautrec was
subject to fits of insanity that only Sister Auguste could control. She
told me so herself. In her absence, he must have attacked you, and in
the course of the struggle you struck him in order to save your own
life. Frightened at your awful situation, you rang the bell, and fled
without even taking the blue diamond from the finger of your victim. A
few minutes later you returned with one of Arsène Lupin’s accomplices,
who was a servant in the adjoining house, you placed the baron on the
bed, you put the room in order, but you were afraid to take the blue
diamond. Now, I have told you what happened on that night. I repeat,
you did not murder the baron, and yet it was your hand that struck the
blow.”

She had crossed them over her forehead—those long delicate white
hands—and kept them thus for a long time. At last, loosening her
fingers, she said, in a voice rent by anguish:

“And do you intend to tell all that to my father?”

“Yes; and I will tell him that I have secured as witnesses:
Mademoiselle Gerbois, who will recognize the blonde Lady; Sister
Auguste, who will recognize Antoinette Bréhat; and the Countess de
Crozon, who will recognize Madame de Réal. That is what I shall tell
him.”

“You will not dare,” she said, recovering her self-possession in the
face of an immediate peril.

He arose, and made a step toward the library. Clotilde stopped him:

“One moment, monsieur.”

She paused, reflected a moment, and then, perfect mistress of herself,
said:

“You are Herlock Sholmes?”

“Yes.”

“What do you want of me?”

“What do I want? I am fighting a duel with Arsène Lupin, and I must
win. The contest is now drawing to a climax, and I have an idea that a
hostage as precious as you will give me an important advantage over my
adversary. Therefore, you will follow me, mademoiselle; I will entrust
you to one of my friends. As soon as the duel is ended, you will be set
at liberty.”

“Is that all?”

“That is all. I do not belong to the police service of this country,
and, consequently, I do not consider that I am under any obligation ...
to cause your arrest.”

She appeared to have come to a decision ... yet she required a
momentary respite. She closed her eyes, the better to concentrate her
thoughts. Sholmes looked at her in surprise; she was now so tranquil
and, apparently, indifferent to the dangers which threatened her.
Sholmes thought: Does she believe that she is in danger? Probably
not—since Lupin protects her. She has confidence in him. She believes
that Lupin is omnipotent, and infallible.

“Mademoiselle,” he said, “I told you that we would leave here in five
minutes. That time has almost expired.”

“Will you permit me to go to my room, monsieur, to get some necessary
articles?”

“Certainly, mademoiselle; and I will wait for you in the rue
Montchanin. Jeanniot, the concierge, is a friend of mine.”

“Ah! you know....” she said, visibly alarmed.

“I know many things.”

“Very well. I will ring for the maid.”

The maid brought her hat and jacket. Then Sholmes said:

“You must give Monsieur Destange some reason for our departure, and, if
possible, let your excuse serve for an absence of several days.”

“That shall not be necessary. I shall be back very soon.”

They exchanged defiant glances and an ironic smile.

“What faith you have in him!” said Sholmes.

“Absolute.”

“He does everything well, doesn’t he? He succeeds in everything he
undertakes. And whatever he does receives your approval and
cooperation.”

“I love him,” she said, with a touch of passion in her voice.

“And you think that he will save you?”

She shrugged her shoulders, and, approaching her father, she said:

“I am going to deprive you of Monsieur Stickmann. We are going to the
National Library.”

“You will return for luncheon?”

“Perhaps ... no, I think not ... but don’t be uneasy.”

Then she said to Sholmes, in a firm voice:

“I am at your service, monsieur.”

“Absolutely?”

“Quite so.”

“I warn you that if you attempt to escape, I shall call the police and
have you arrested. Do not forget that the blonde Lady is on parole.”

“I give you my word of honor that I shall not attempt to escape.”

“I believe you. Now, let us go.”

They left the house together, as he had predicted.

The automobile was standing where Sholmes had left it. As they
approached it, Sholmes could hear the rumbling of the motor. He opened
the door, asked Clotilde to enter, and took a seat beside her. The
machine started at once, gained the exterior boulevards, the avenue
Hoche and the avenue de la Grande-Armée. Sholmes was considering his
plans. He thought:

“Ganimard is at home. I will leave the girl in his care. Shall I tell
him who she is? No, he would take her to prison at once, and that would
spoil everything. When I am alone, I can consult my list of addresses
taken from the ‘account M.B.,’ and run them down. To-night, or
to-morrow morning at the latest, I shall go to Ganimard, as I agreed,
and deliver into his hands Arsène Lupin and all his band.”

He rubbed his hand, gleefully, at the thought that his duel with Lupin
was drawing to a close, and he could not see any serious obstacle in
the way of his success. And, yielding to an irrepressible desire to
give vent to his feelings—an unusual desire on his part—he exclaimed:

“Excuse me, mademoiselle, if I am unable to conceal my satisfaction and
delight. The battle has been a difficult one, and my success is,
therefore, more enjoyable.”

“A legitimate success, monsieur, of which you have a just right to be
proud.”

“Thank you. But where are we going? The chauffeur must have
misunderstood my directions.”

At that moment they were leaving Paris by the gate de Neuilly. That was
strange, as the rue Pergolese is not outside the fortifications.
Sholmes lowered the glass, and said:

“Chauffeur, you have made a mistake.... Rue Pergolese!”

The man made no reply. Sholmes repeated, in a louder voice:

“I told you to go to the rue Pergolese.”

Still the man did not reply.

“Ah! but you are deaf, my friend. Or is he doing it on purpose? We are
very much out of our way.... Rue Pergolese!... Turn back at once!...
Rue Pergolese!”

The chauffeur made no sign of having heard the order. The Englishman
fretted with impatience. He looked at Clotilde; a mysterious smile
played upon her lips.

“Why do you laugh?” he said. “It is an awkward mistake, but it won’t
help you.”

“Of course not,” she replied.

Then an idea occurred to him. He rose and made a careful scrutiny of
the chauffeur. His shoulders were not so broad; his bearing was not so
stiff and mechanical. A cold perspiration covered his forehead and his
hands clenched with sudden fear, as his mind was seized with the
conviction that the chauffeur was Arsène Lupin.

“Well, Monsieur Sholmes, what do you think of our little ride?”

“Delightful, monsieur, really delightful,” replied Sholmes.

Never in his life had he experienced so much difficulty in uttering a
few simple words without a tremor, or without betraying his feelings in
his voice. But quickly, by a sort of reaction, a flood of hatred and
rage burst its bounds, overcame his self-control, and, brusquely
drawing his revolver, he pointed it at Mademoiselle Destange.

“Lupin, stop, this minute, this second, or I fire at mademoiselle.”

“I advise you to aim at the cheek if you wish to hit the temple,”
replied Lupin, without turning his head.

“Maxime, don’t go so fast,” said Clotilde, “the pavement is slippery
and I am very timid.”

She was smiling; her eyes were fixed on the pavement, over which the
carriage was traveling at enormous speed.

“Let him stop! Let him stop!” said Sholmes to her, wild with rage, “I
warn you that I am desperate.”

The barrel of the revolver brushed the waving locks of her hair. She
replied, calmly:

“Maxime is so imprudent. He is going so fast, I am really afraid of
some accident.”

Sholmes returned the weapon to his pocket and seized the handle of the
door, as if to alight, despite the absurdity of such an act. Clotilde
said to him:

“Be careful, monsieur, there is an automobile behind us.”

He leaned over. There was an automobile close behind; a large machine
of formidable aspect with its sharp prow and blood-red body, and
holding four men clad in fur coats.

“Ah! I am well guarded,” thought Sholmes. “I may as well be patient.”

He folded his arms across his chest with that proud air of submission
so frequently assumed by heroes when fate has turned against them. And
while they crossed the river Seine and rushed through Suresnes, Rueil
and Chatou, motionless and resigned, controlling his actions and his
passions, he tried to explain to his own satisfaction by what miracle
Arsène Lupin had substituted himself for the chauffeur. It was quite
improbable that the honest-looking fellow he had selected on the
boulevard that morning was an accomplice placed there in advance. And
yet Arsène Lupin had received a warning in some way, and it must have
been after he, Sholmes, had approached Clotilde in the house, because
no one could have suspected his project prior to that time. Since then,
Sholmes had not allowed Clotilde out of his sight.

Then an idea struck him: the telephone communication desired by
Clotilde and her conversation with the dressmaker. Now, it was all
quite clear to him. Even before he had spoken to her, simply upon his
request to speak to her as the new secretary of Monsieur Destange, she
had scented the danger, surmised the name and purpose of the visitor,
and, calmly, naturally, as if she were performing a commonplace action
of her every-day life, she had called Arsène Lupin to her assistance by
some preconcerted signal.

How Arsène Lupin had come and caused himself to be substituted for the
chauffeur were matters of trifling importance. That which affected
Sholmes, even to the point of appeasing his fury, was the recollection
of that incident whereby an ordinary woman, a sweetheart it is true,
mastering her nerves, controlling her features, and subjugating the
expression of her eyes, had completely deceived the astute detective
Herlock Sholmes. How difficult to overcome an adversary who is aided by
such confederates, and who, by the mere force of his authority,
inspires in a woman so much courage and strength!

They crossed the Seine and climbed the hill at Saint-Germain; but, some
five hundred metres beyond that town, the automobile slackened its
speed. The other automobile advanced, and the two stopped, side by
side. There was no one else in the neighborhood.

“Monsieur Sholmes,” said Lupin, “kindly exchange to the other machine.
Ours is really a very slow one.”

“Indeed!” said Sholmes, calmly, convinced that he had no choice.

“Also, permit me to loan you a fur coat, as we will travel quite fast
and the air is cool. And accept a couple of sandwiches, as we cannot
tell when we will dine.”

The four men alighted from the other automobile. One of them
approached, and, as he raised his goggles, Sholmes recognized in him
the gentleman in the frock coat that he had seen at the Hungarian
restaurant. Lupin said to him:

“You will return this machine to the chauffeur from whom I hired it. He
is waiting in the first wine-shop to the right as you go up the rue
Legendre. You will give him the balance of the thousand francs I
promised him.... Ah! yes, kindly give your goggles to Monsieur
Sholmes.”

He talked to Mlle. Destange for a moment, then took his place at the
wheel and started, with Sholmes at his side and one of his men behind
him. Lupin had not exaggerated when he said “we will travel quite
fast.” From the beginning he set a breakneck pace. The horizon rushed
to meet them, as if attracted by some mysterious force, and disappeared
instantly as though swallowed up in an abyss, into which many other
things, such as trees, houses, fields and forests, were hurled with the
tumultuous fury and haste of a torrent as it approached the cataract.

Sholmes and Lupin did not exchange a word. Above their heads the leaves
of the poplars made a great noise like the waves of the sea,
rhythmically arranged by the regular spacing of the trees. And the
towns swept by like spectres: Manteo, Vernon, Gaillon. From one hill to
the other, from Bon-Secours to Canteleu, Rouen, its suburbs, its
harbor, its miles of wharves, Rouen seemed like the straggling street
of a country village. And this was Duclair, Caudebec, the country of
Caux which they skimmed over in their terrific flight, and Lillebonne,
and Quillebeuf. Then, suddenly, they found themselves on the banks of
the Seine, at the extremity of a little wharf, beside which lay a
staunch sea-going yacht that emitted great volumes of black smoke from
its funnel.

The automobile stopped. In two hours they had traveled over forty
leagues.

A man, wearing a blue uniform and a goldlaced cap, came forward and
saluted. Lupin said to him:

“All ready, captain? Did you receive my telegram?”

“Yes, I got it.”

“Is _The Swallow_ ready?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Come, Monsieur Sholmes.”

The Englishman looked around, saw a group of people on the terrace in
front of a café, hesitated a moment, then, realizing that before he
could secure any assistance he would be seized, carried aboard and
placed in the bottom of the hold, he crossed the gang-plank and
followed Lupin into the captain’s cabin. It was quite a large room,
scrupulously clean, and presented a cheerful appearance with its
varnished woodwork and polished brass. Lupin closed the door and
addressed Sholmes abruptly, and almost rudely, as he said:

“Well, what do you know?”

“Everything.”

“Everything? Come, be precise.”

His voice contained no longer that polite, if ironical, tone, which he
had affected when speaking to the Englishman. Now, his voice had the
imperious tone of a master accustomed to command and accustomed to be
obeyed—even by a Herlock Sholmes. They measured each other by their
looks, enemies now—open and implacable foes. Lupin spoke again, but in
a milder tone:

“I have grown weary of your pursuit, and do not intend to waste any
more time in avoiding the traps you lay for me. I warn you that my
treatment of you will depend on your reply. Now, what do you know?”

“Everything, monsieur.”

Arsène Lupin controlled his temper and said, in a jerky manner:

“I will tell you what you know. You know that, under the name of Maxime
Bermond, I have ... _improved_ fifteen houses that were originally
constructed by Monsieur Destange.”

“Yes.”

“Of those fifteen houses, you have seen four.”

“Yes.”

“And you have a list of the other eleven.”

“Yes.”

“You made that list at Monsieur Destange’s house on that night, no
doubt.”

“Yes.”

“And you have an idea that, amongst those eleven houses, there is one
that I have kept for the use of myself and my friends, and you have
intrusted to Ganimard the task of finding my retreat.”

“No.”

“What does that signify?”

“It signifies that I choose to act alone, and do not want his help.”

“Then I have nothing to fear, since you are in my hands.”

“You have nothing to fear as long as I remain in your hands.”

“You mean that you will not remain?”

“Yes.”

Arsène Lupin approached the Englishman and, placing his hand on the
latter’s shoulder, said:

“Listen, monsieur; I am not in a humor to argue with you, and,
unfortunately for you, you are not in a position to choose. So let us
finish our business.”

“Very well.”

“You are going to give me your word of honor that you will not try to
escape from this boat until you arrive in English waters.”

“I give you my word of honor that I shall escape if I have an
opportunity,” replied the indomitable Sholmes.

“But, sapristi! you know quite well that at a word from me you would
soon be rendered helpless. All these men will obey me blindly. At a
sign from me they would place you in irons——”

“Irons can be broken.”

“And throw you overboard ten miles from shore.”

“I can swim.”

“I hadn’t thought of that,” said Lupin, with a laugh. “Excuse me,
master ... and let us finish. You will agree that I must take the
measures necessary to protect myself and my friends.”

“Certainly; but they will be useless.”

“And yet you do not wish me to take them.”

“It is your duty.”

“Very well, then.”

Lupin opened the door and called the captain and two sailors. The
latter seized the Englishman, bound him hand and foot, and tied him to
the captain’s bunk.

“That will do,” said Lupin. “It was only on account of your obstinacy
and the unusual gravity of the situation, that I ventured to offer you
this indignity.”

The sailors retired. Lupin said to the captain:

“Let one of the crew remain here to look after Monsieur Sholmes, and
you can give him as much of your own company as possible. Treat him
with all due respect and consideration. He is not a prisoner, but a
guest. What time have you, captain?”

“Five minutes after two.”

Lupin consulted his watch, then looked at the clock that was attached
to the wall of the cabin.

“Five minutes past two is right. How long will it take you to reach
Southampton?”

“Nine hours, easy going.”

“Make it eleven. You must not land there until after the departure of
the midnight boat, which reaches Havre at eight o’clock in the morning.
Do you understand, captain? Let me repeat: As it would be very
dangerous for all of us to permit Monsieur to return to France by that
boat, you must not reach Southampton before one o’clock in the
morning.”

“I understand.”

“Au revoir, master; next year, in this world or in the next.”

“Until to-morrow,” replied Sholmes.

A few minutes later Sholmes heard the automobile going away, and at the
same time the steam puffed violently in the depths of _The Swallow_.
The boat had started for England. About three o’clock the vessel left
the mouth of the river and plunged into the open sea. At that moment
Sholmes was lying on the captain’s bunk, sound asleep.


Next morning—it being the tenth and last day of the duel between
Sholmes and Lupin—the _Echo de France_ published this interesting bit
of news:

“Yesterday a judgment of ejectment was entered in the case of Arsène
Lupin against Herlock Sholmes, the English detective. Although signed
at noon, the judgment was executed the same day. At one o’clock this
morning Sholmes was landed at Southampton.”




CHAPTER VI.
SECOND ARREST OF ARSÈNE LUPIN.


Since eight o’clock a dozen moving-vans had encumbered the rue Crevaux
between the avenue du Bois-de-Boulogne and the avenue Bugeaud. Mon.
Felix Davey was leaving the apartment in which he lived on the fourth
floor of No. 8; and Mon. Dubreuil, who had united into a single
apartment the fifth floor of the same house and the fifth floor of the
two adjoining houses, was moving on the same day—a mere coincidence,
since the gentlemen were unknown to each other—the vast collection of
furniture regarding which so many foreign agents visited him every day.

A circumstance which had been noticed by some of the neighbors, but was
not spoken of until later, was this: None of the twelve vans bore the
name and address of the owner, and none of the men accompanying them
visited the neighboring wine shops. They worked so diligently that the
furniture was all out by eleven o’clock. Nothing remained but those
scraps of papers and rags that are always left behind in the corners of
the empty rooms.

Mon. Felix Davey, an elegant young man, dressed in the latest fashion,
carried in his hand a walking-stick, the weight of which indicated that
its owner possessed extraordinary biceps—Mon. Felix Davey walked calmly
away and took a seat on a bench in the avenue du Bois-de-Boulogne
facing the rue Pergolese. Close to him a woman, dressed in a neat but
inexpensive costume, was reading a newspaper, whilst a child was
playing with a shovel in a heap of sand.

After a few minutes Felix Davey spoke to the woman, without turning his
head:

“Ganimard?”

“Went out at nine o’clock this morning.”

“Where?”

“To police headquarters.”

“Alone?”

“Yes.”

“No telegram during the night?”

“No.”

“Do they suspect you in the house?”

“No; I do some little things for Madame Ganimard, and she tells me
everything her husband does. I have been with her all morning.”

“Very well. Until further orders come here every day at eleven
o’clock.”

He rose and walked away in the direction of the Dauphine gate, stopping
at the Chinese pavilion, where he partook of a frugal repast consisting
of two eggs, with some fruit and vegetables. Then he returned to the
rue Crevaux and said to the concierge:

“I will just glance through the rooms and then give you the keys.”

He finished his inspection of the room that he had used as a library;
then he seized the end of a gas-pipe, which hung down the side of the
chimney. The pipe was bent and a hole made in the elbow. To this hole
he fitted a small instrument in the form of an ear-trumpet and blew
into it. A slight whistling sound came by way of reply. Placing the
trumpet to his mouth, he said:

“Anyone around, Dubreuil?”

“No.”

“May I come up?”

“Yes.”

He returned the pipe to its place, saying to himself:

“How progressive we are! Our century abounds with little inventions
which render life really charming and picturesque. And so amusing!...
especially when a person knows how to enjoy life as I do.”

He turned one of the marble mouldings of the mantel, and the entire
half of the mantel moved, and the mirror above it glided in invisible
grooves, disclosing an opening and the lower steps of a stairs built in
the very body of the chimney; all very clean and complete—the stairs
were constructed of polished metal and the walls of white tiles. He
ascended the steps, and at the fifth floor there was the same opening
in the chimney. Mon. Dubreuil was waiting for him.

“Have you finished in your rooms?”

“Yes.”

“Everything cleared out?”

“Yes.”

“And the people?”

“Only the three men on guard.”

“Very well; come on.”

They ascended to the upper floor by the same means, one after the
other, and there found three men, one of whom was looking through the
window.

“Anything new?”

“Nothing, governor.”

“All quiet in the street?”

“Yes.”

“In ten minutes I will be ready to leave. You will go also. But in the
meantime if you see the least suspicious movement in the street, warn
me.”

“I have my finger on the alarm-bell all the time.”

“Dubreuil, did you tell the moving men not to touch the wire of that
bell?”

“Certainly; it is working all right.”

“That is all I want to know.”

The two gentlemen then descended to the apartment of Felix Davey and
the latter, after adjusting the marble mantel, exclaimed, joyfully:

“Dubreuil, I should like to see the man who is able to discover all the
ingenious devices, warning bells, net-works of electric wires and
acoustic tubes, invisible passages, moving floors and hidden stairways.
A real fairy-land!”

“What fame for Arsène Lupin!”

“Fame I could well dispense with. It’s a pity to be compelled to leave
a place so well equipped, and commence all over again, Dubreuil ... and
on a new model, of course, for it would never do to duplicate this.
Curse Herlock Sholmes!”

“Has he returned to Paris?”

“How could he? There has been only one boat come from Southampton and
it left there at midnight; only one train from Havre, leaving there at
eight o’clock this morning and due in Paris at eleven fifteen. As he
could not catch the midnight boat at Southampton—and the instructions
to the captain on that point were explicit—he cannot reach France until
this evening via Newhaven and Dieppe.”

“Do you think he will come back?”

“Yes; he never gives up. He will return to Paris; but it will be too
late. We will be far away.”

“And Mademoiselle Destange?”

“I am to see her in an hour.”

“At her house?”

“Oh! no; she will not return there for several days. But you, Dubreuil,
you must hurry. The loading of our goods will take a long time and you
should be there to look after them.”

“Are you sure that we are not being watched?”

“By whom? I am not afraid of anyone but Sholmes.”

Dubreuil retired. Felix Davey made a last tour of the apartment, picked
up two or three torn letters, then, noticing a piece of chalk, he took
it and, on the dark paper of the drawing-room, drew a large frame and
wrote within it the following:

“_Arsène Lupin, gentleman-burglar, lived here for five years at the
beginning of the twentieth century_.”

This little pleasantry seemed to please him very much. He looked at it
for a moment, whistling a lively air, then said to himself:

“Now that I have placed myself in touch with the historians of future
generations, I can go. You must hurry, Herlock Sholmes, as I shall
leave my present abode in three minutes, and your defeat will be an
accomplished fact.... Two minutes more! you are keeping me waiting,
Monsieur Sholmes.... One minute more! Are you not coming? Well, then, I
proclaim your downfall and my apotheosis. And now I make my escape.
Farewell, kingdom of Arsène Lupin! I shall never see you again.
Farewell to the fifty-five rooms of the six apartments over which I
reigned! Farewell, my own royal bed chamber!”

His outburst of joy was interrupted by the sharp ringing of a bell,
which stopped twice, started again and then ceased. It was the alarm
bell.

What was wrong? What unforeseen danger? Ganimard? No; that wasn’t
possible!

He was on the point of returning to his library and making his escape.
But, first, he went to the window. There was no one in the street. Was
the enemy already in the house? He listened and thought he could
discern certain confused sounds. He hesitated no longer. He ran to his
library, and as he crossed the threshold he heard the noise of a key
being inserted in the lock of the vestibule door.

“The deuce!” he murmured; “I have no time to lose. The house may be
surrounded. The servants’ stairway—impossible! Fortunately, there is
the chimney.”

He pushed the moulding; it did not move. He made a greater effort—still
it refused to move. At the same time he had the impression that the
door below opened and that he could hear footsteps.

“Good God!” he cried; “I am lost if this cursed mechanism—”

He pushed with all his strength. Nothing moved—nothing! By some
incredible accident, by some evil stroke of fortune, the mechanism,
which had worked only a few moments ago, would not work now.

He was furious. The block of marble remained immovable. He uttered
frightful imprecations on the senseless stone. Was his escape to be
prevented by that stupid obstacle? He struck the marble wildly, madly;
he hammered it, he cursed it.

“Ah! what’s the matter, Monsieur Lupin? You seem to be displeased about
something.”

Lupin turned around. Herlock Sholmes stood before him!


Herlock Sholmes!... Lupin gazed at him with squinting eyes as if his
sight were defective and misleading. Herlock Sholmes in Paris! Herlock
Sholmes, whom he had shipped to England only the day before as a
dangerous person, now stood before him free and victorious!... Ah! such
a thing was nothing less than a miracle; it was contrary to all natural
laws; it was the culmination of all that is illogical and abnormal....
Herlock Sholmes here—before his face!

And when the Englishman spoke his words were tinged with that keen
sarcasm and mocking politeness with which his adversary had so often
lashed him. He said:

“Monsieur Lupin, in the first place I have the honor to inform you that
at this time and place I blot from my memory forever all thoughts of
the miserable night that you forced me to endure in the house of Baron
d’Hautrec, of the injury done to my friend Wilson, of my abduction in
the automobile, and of the voyage I took yesterday under your orders,
bound to a very uncomfortable couch. But the joy of this moment effaces
all those bitter memories. I forgive everything. I forget everything—I
wipe out the debt. I am paid—and royally paid.”

Lupin made no reply. So the Englishman continued:

“Don’t you think so yourself?”

He appeared to insist as if demanding an acquiescence, as a sort of
receipt in regard to the part.

After a moment’s reflection, during which the Englishman felt that he
was scrutinized to the very depth of his soul, Lupin declared:

“I presume, monsieur, that your conduct is based upon serious motives?”

“Very serious.”

“The fact that you have escaped from my captain and his crew is only a
secondary incident of our struggle. But the fact that you are here
before me alone—understand, alone—face to face with Arsène Lupin, leads
me to think that your revenge is as complete as possible.”

“As complete as possible.”

“This house?”

“Surrounded.”

“The two adjoining houses?”

“Surrounded.”

“The apartment above this?”

“The _three_ apartments on the fifth floor that were formerly occupied
by Monsieur Dubreuil are surrounded.”

“So that——”

“So that you are captured, Monsieur Lupin—absolutely captured.”

The feelings that Sholmes had experienced during his trip in the
automobile were now suffered by Lupin, the same concentrated fury, the
same revolt, and also, let us admit, the same loyalty of submission to
force of circumstances. Equally brave in victory or defeat.

“Our accounts are squared, monsieur,” said Lupin, frankly.

The Englishman was pleased with that confession. After a short silence
Lupin, now quite self-possessed, said smiling:

“And I am not sorry! It becomes monotonous to win all the time.
Yesterday I had only to stretch out my hand to finish you forever.
Today I belong to you. The game is yours.” Lupin laughed heartily and
then continued: “At last the gallery will be entertained! Lupin in
prison! How will he get out? In prison!... What an adventure!... Ah!
Sholmes, life is just one damn thing after another!”

He pressed his closed hands to his temples as if to suppress the
tumultuous joy that surged within him, and his actions indicated that
he was moved by an uncontrollable mirth. At last, when he had recovered
his self-possession, he approached the detective and said:

“And now what are you waiting for?”

“What am I waiting for?”

“Yes; Ganimard is here with his men—why don’t they come in?”

“I asked him not to.”

“And he consented?”

“I accepted his services on condition that he would be guided by me.
Besides, he thinks that Felix Davey is only an accomplice of Arsène
Lupin.”

“Then I will repeat my question in another form. Why did you come in
alone?”

“Because I wished to speak to you alone.”

“Ah! ah! you have something to say to me.”

That idea seemed to please Lupin immensely. There are certain
circumstances in which words are preferable to deeds.

“Monsieur Sholmes, I am sorry I cannot offer you an easy chair. How
would you like that broken box? Or perhaps you would prefer the window
ledge? I am sure a glass of beer would be welcome ... light or dark?...
But sit down, please.”

“Thank you; we can talk as well standing up.”

“Very well—proceed.”

“I will be brief. The object of my sojourn in France was not to
accomplish your arrest. If I have been led to pursue you, it was
because I saw no other way to achieve my real object.”

“Which was?”

“To recover the blue diamond.”

“The blue diamond!”

“Certainly; since the one found in Herr Bleichen’s tooth-powder was
only an imitation.”

“Quite right; the genuine diamond was taken by the blonde Lady. I made
an exact duplicate of it and then, as I had designs on other jewels
belonging to the Countess and as the Consul Herr Bleichen was already
under suspicion, the aforesaid blonde Lady, in order to avert
suspicion, slipped the false stone into the aforesaid Consul’s
luggage.”

“While you kept the genuine diamond?”

“Of course.”

“That diamond—I want it.”

“I am very sorry, but it is impossible.”

“I have promised it to the Countess de Crozon. I must have it.”

“How will you get it, since it is in my possession?”

“That is precisely the reason—because it is in your possession.”

“Oh! I am to give it to you?”

“Yes.”

“Voluntarily?”

“I will buy it.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Lupin, in an access of mirth, “you are certainly an
Englishman. You treat this as a matter of business.”

“It is a matter of business.”

“Well? what is your offer?”

“The liberty of Mademoiselle Destange.”

“Her liberty?... I didn’t know she was under arrest.”

“I will give Monsieur Ganimard the necessary information. When deprived
of your protection, she can readily be taken.”

Lupin laughed again, and said:

“My dear monsieur, you are offering me something you do not possess.
Mademoiselle Destange is in a place of safety, and has nothing to fear.
You must make me another offer.”

The Englishman hesitated, visibly embarrassed and vexed. Then, placing
his hand on the shoulder of his adversary, he said:

“And if I should propose to you—”

“My liberty?”

“No ... but I can leave the room to consult with Ganimard.”

“And leave me alone?”

“Yes.”

“Ah! mon dieu, what good would that be? The cursed mechanism will not
work,” said Lupin, at the same time savagely pushing the moulding of
the mantel. He stifled a cry of surprise; this time fortune favored
him—the block of marble moved. It was his salvation; his hope of
escape. In that event, why submit to the conditions imposed by Sholmes?
He paced up and down the room, as if he were considering his reply.
Then, in his turn, he placed his hand on the shoulder of his adversary,
and said:

“All things considered, Monsieur Sholmes, I prefer to do my own
business in my own way.”

“But—”

“No, I don’t require anyone’s assistance.”

“When Ganimard gets his hand on you, it will be all over. You can’t
escape from them.”

“Who knows?”

“Come, that is foolish. Every door and window is guarded.”

“Except one.”

“Which?”

“_The one I will choose_.”

“Mere words! Your arrest is as good as made.”

“Oh! no—not at all.”

“Well?”

“I shall keep the blue diamond.”

Sholmes looked at his watch, and said:

“It is now ten minutes to three. At three o’clock I shall call
Ganimard.”

“Well, then, we have ten minutes to chat. And to satisfy my curiosity,
Monsieur Sholmes, I should like to know how you procured my address and
my name of Felix Davey?”

Although his adversary’s easy manner caused Sholmes some anxiety, he
was willing to give Lupin the desired information since it reflected
credit on his professional astuteness; so he replied:

“Your address? I got it from the blonde Lady.”

“Clotilde!”

“Herself. Do you remember, yesterday morning, when I wished to take her
away in the automobile, she telephoned to her dressmaker.”

“Well?”

“Well, I understood, later, that you were the dressmaker. And last
night, on the boat, by exercising my memory—and my memory is something
I have good reason to be proud of—I was able to recollect the last two
figures of your telephone number—73. Then, as I possessed a list of the
houses you had ‘improved,’ it was an easy matter, on my arrival in
Paris at eleven o’clock this morning, to search in the telephone
directory and find there the name and address of Felix Davey. Having
obtained that information, I asked the aid of Monsieur Ganimard.”

“Admirable! I congratulate you. But how did you manage to catch the
eight o’clock train at Havre? How did you escape from _The Swallow_?”

“I did not escape.”

“But——”

“You ordered the captain not to reach Southampton before one o’clock.
He landed me there at midnight. I was able to catch the twelve o’clock
boat for Havre.”

“Did the captain betray me? I can’t believe it.”

“No, he did not betray you.”

“Well, what then?”

“It was his watch.”

“His watch?”

“Yes, I put it ahead one hour.”

“How?”

“In the usual way, by turning the hands. We were sitting side by side,
talking, and I was telling him some funny stories.... Why! he never saw
me do it.”

“Bravo! a very clever trick. I shall not forget it. But the clock that
was hanging on the wall of the cabin?”

“Ah! the clock was a more difficult matter, as my feet were tied, but
the sailor, who guarded me during the captain’s absence, was kind
enough to turn the hands for me.”

“He? Nonsense! He wouldn’t do it.”

“Oh! but he didn’t know the importance of his act. I told him I must
catch the first train for London, at any price, and ... he allowed
himself to be persuaded——”

“By means of——”

“By means of a slight gift, which the excellent fellow, loyal and true
to his master, intends to send to you.”

“What was it?”

“A mere trifle.”

“But what?”

“The blue diamond.”

“The blue diamond!”

“Yes, the false stone that you substituted for the Countess’ diamond.
She gave it to me.”

There was a sudden explosion of violent laughter. Lupin laughed until
the tears started in his eyes.

“Mon dieu, but it is funny! My false diamond palmed off on my innocent
sailor! And the captain’s watch! And the hands of the clock!”

Sholmes felt that the duel between him and Lupin was keener than ever.
His marvellous instinct warned him that, behind his adversary’s display
of mirth, there was a shrewd intellect debating the ways and means to
escape. Gradually Lupin approached the Englishman, who recoiled, and,
unconsciously, slipped his hand into his watch-pocket.

“It is three o’clock, Monsieur Lupin.”

“Three o’clock, already? What a pity! We were enjoying our chat so
much.”

“I am waiting for your answer.”

“My answer? Mon dieu! but you are particular!... And so this is the
last move in our little game—and the stake is my liberty!”

“Or the blue diamond.”

“Very well. It’s your play. What are you going to do?”

“I play the king,” said Sholmes, as he fired his revolver.

“And I the ace,” replied Lupin, as he struck at Sholmes with his fist.

Sholmes had fired into the air, as a signal to Ganimard, whose
assistance he required. But Lupin’s fist had caught Sholmes in the
stomach, and caused him to double up with pain. Lupin rushed to the
fireplace and set the marble slab in motion.... Too late! The door
opened.

“Surrender, Lupin, or I fire!”

Ganimard, doubtless stationed closer than Lupin had thought, Ganimard
was there, with his revolver turned on Lupin. And behind Ganimard there
were twenty men, strong and ruthless fellows, who would beat him like a
dog at the least sign of resistance.

“Hands down! I surrender!” said Lupin, calmly; and he folded his arms
across his breast.

Everyone was amazed. In the room, divested of its furniture and
hangings, Arsène Lupin’s words sounded like an echo.... “I surrender!”
... It seemed incredible. No one would have been astonished if he had
suddenly vanished through a trap, or if a section of the wall had
rolled away and allowed him to escape. But he surrendered!

Ganimard advanced, nervously, and with all the gravity that the
importance of the occasion demanded, he placed his hand on the shoulder
of his adversary, and had the infinite pleasure of saying:

“I arrest you, Arsène Lupin.”

“Brrr!” said Lupin, “you make me shiver, my dear Ganimard. What a
lugubrious face! One would imagine you were speaking over the grave of
a friend. For Heaven’s sake, don’t assume such a funereal air.”

“I arrest you.”

“Don’t let that worry you! In the name of the law, of which he is a
well-deserving pillar, Ganimard, the celebrated Parisian detective,
arrests the wicked Arsène Lupin. An historic event, of which you will
appreciate the true importance.... And it is the second time that it
has happened. Bravo, Ganimard, you are sure of advancement in your
chosen profession!”

And he held out his wrists for the hand-cuffs. Ganimard adjusted them
in a most solemn manner. The numerous policemen, despite their
customary presumption and the bitterness of their feelings toward
Lupin, conducted themselves with becoming modesty, astonished at being
permitted to gaze upon that mysterious and intangible creature.

“My poor Lupin,” sighed our hero, “what would your aristocratic friends
say if they should see you in this humiliating position?”

He pulled his wrists apart with all his strength. The veins in his
forehead expanded. The links of the chain cut into his flesh. The chain
fell off—broken.

“Another, comrades, that one was useless.”

They placed two on him this time.

“Quite right,” he said. “You cannot be too careful.”

Then, counting the detectives and policemen, he said:

“How many are you, my friends? Twenty-five? Thirty? That’s too many. I
can’t do anything. Ah! if there had been only fifteen!”

There was something fascinating about Lupin; it was the fascination of
the great actor who plays his rôle with spirit and understanding,
combined with assurance and ease. Sholmes regarded him as one might
regard a beautiful painting with a due appreciation of all its
perfection in coloring and technique. And he really thought that it was
an equal struggle between those thirty men on one side, armed as they
were with all the strength and majesty of the law, and, on the other
side, that solitary individual, unarmed and handcuffed. Yes, the two
sides were well-matched.

“Well, master,” said Lupin to the Englishman, “this is your work.
Thanks to you, Lupin is going to rot on the damp straw of a dungeon.
Confess that your conscience pricks you a little, and that your soul is
filled with remorse.”

In spite of himself, Sholmes shrugged his shoulders, as if to say:
“It’s your own fault.”

“Never! never!” exclaimed Lupin. “Give you the blue diamond? Oh! no, it
has cost me too much trouble. I intend to keep it. On my occasion of my
first visit to you in London—which will probably be next month—I will
tell you my reasons. But will you be in London next month? Or do you
prefer Vienna? Or Saint Petersburg?”

Then Lupin received a surprise. A bell commenced to ring. It was not
the alarm-bell, but the bell of the telephone which was located between
the two windows of the room and had not yet been removed.

The telephone! Ah! Who could it be? Who was about to fall into this
unfortunate trap? Arsène Lupin exhibited an access of rage against the
unlucky instrument as if he would like to break it into a thousand
pieces and thus stifle the mysterious voice that was calling for him.
But it was Ganimard who took down the receiver, and said:

“Hello!... Hello!... number 648.73 ... yes, this is it.”

Then Sholmes stepped up, and, with an air of authority, pushed Ganimard
aside, took the receiver, and covered the transmitter with his
handkerchief in order to obscure the tone of his voice. At that moment
he glanced toward Lupin, and the look which they exchanged indicated
that the same idea had occurred to each of them, and that they foresaw
the ultimate result of that theory: it was the blonde Lady who was
telephoning. She wished to telephone to Felix Davey, or rather to
Maxime Bermond, and it was to Sholmes she was about to speak. The
Englishman said:

“Hello ... Hello!”

Then, after a silence, he said:

“Yes, it is I, Maxime.”

The drama had commenced and was progressing with tragic precision.
Lupin, the irrepressible and nonchalant Lupin, did not attempt to
conceal his anxiety, and he strained every nerve in a desire to hear
or, at least, to divine the purport of the conversation. And Sholmes
continued, in reply to the mysterious voice:

“Hello!... Hello!... Yes, everything has been moved, and I am just
ready to leave here and meet you as we agreed.... Where?... Where you
are now.... Don’t believe that he is here yet!...”

Sholmes stopped, seeking for words. It was clear that he was trying to
question the girl without betraying himself, and that he was ignorant
of her whereabouts. Moreover, Ganimard’s presence seemed to embarrass
him.... Ah! if some miracle would only interrupt that cursed
conversation! Lupin prayed for it with all his strength, with all the
intensity of his incited nerves! After a momentary pause, Sholmes
continued:

“Hello!... Hello!... Do you hear me?... I can’t hear you very well....
Can scarcely make out what you say.... Are you listening? Well, I think
you had better return home.... No danger now.... But he is in England!
I have received a telegram from Southampton announcing his arrival.”

The sarcasm of those words! Sholmes uttered them with an inexpressible
comfort. And he added:

“Very well, don’t lose any time. I will meet you there.”

He hung up the receiver.

“Monsieur Ganimard, can you furnish me with three men?”

“For the blonde Lady, eh?”

“Yes.”

“You know who she is, and where she is?”

“Yes.”

“Good! That settles Monsieur Lupin.... Folenfant, take two men, and go
with Monsieur Sholmes.”

The Englishman departed, accompanied by the three men.

The game was ended. The blonde Lady was, also, about to fall into the
hands of the Englishman. Thanks to his commendable persistence and to a
combination of fortuitous circumstances, the battle had resulted in a
victory for the detective, and in irreparable disaster for Lupin.

“Monsieur Sholmes!”

The Englishman stopped.

“Monsieur Lupin?”

Lupin was clearly shattered by this final blow. His forehead was marked
by deep wrinkles. He was sullen and dejected. However, he pulled
himself together, and, notwithstanding his defeat, he exclaimed, in a
cheerful tone:

“You will concede that fate has been against me. A few minutes ago, it
prevented my escape through that chimney, and delivered me into your
hands. Now, by means of the telephone, it presents you with the blonde
Lady. I submit to its decrees.”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean that I am ready to re-open our negotiation.”

Sholmes took Ganimard aside and asked, in a manner that did not permit
a reply, the authority to exchange a few words with the prisoner. Then
he approached Lupin, and said, in a sharp, nervous tone:

“What do you want?”

“Mademoiselle Destange’s liberty.”

“You know the price.”

“Yes.”

“And you accept?”

“Yes; I accept your terms.”

“Ah!” said the Englishman, in surprise, “but ... you refused ... for
yourself——”

“Yes, I can look out for myself, Monsieur Sholmes, but now the question
concerns a young woman ... and a woman I love. In France, understand,
we have very decided ideas about such things. And Lupin has the same
feelings as other people.”

He spoke with simplicity and candor. Sholmes replied by an almost
imperceptible inclination of his head, and murmured:

“Very well, the blue diamond.”

“Take my cane, there, at the end of the mantel. Press on the head of
the cane with one hand, and, with the other, turn the iron ferrule at
the bottom.”

Holmes took the cane and followed the directions. As he did so, the
head of the cane divided and disclosed a cavity which contained a small
ball of wax which, in turn, enclosed a diamond. He examined it. It was
the blue diamond.

“Monsieur Lupin, Mademoiselle Destange is free.”

“Is her future safety assured? Has she nothing to fear from you?”

“Neither from me, nor anyone else.”

“How can you manage it?”

“Quite easily. I have forgotten her name and address.”

“Thank you. And au revoir—for I will see you again, sometime, Monsieur
Sholmes?”

“I have no doubt of it.”

Then followed an animated conversation between Sholmes and Ganimard,
which was abruptly terminated by the Englishman, who said:

“I am very sorry, Monsieur Ganimard, that we cannot agree on that
point, but I have no time to waste trying to convince you. I leave for
England within an hour.”

“But ... the blonde Lady?”

“I do not know such a person.”

“And yet, a moment ago——”

“You must take the affair as it stands. I have delivered Arsène Lupin
into your hands. Here is the blue diamond, which you will have the
pleasure of returning to the Countess de Crozon. What more do you
want?”

“The blonde Lady.”

“Find her.”

Sholmes pulled his cap down over his forehead and walked rapidly away,
like a man who is accustomed to go as soon as his business is finished.

“Bon voyage, monsieur,” cried Lupin, “and, believe me, I shall never
forget the friendly way in which our little business affairs have been
arranged. My regards to Monsieur Wilson.”

Not receiving any reply, Lupin added, sneeringly:

“That is what is called ‘taking British leave.’ Ah! their insular
dignity lacks the flower of courtesy by which we are distinguished.
Consider for a moment, Ganimard, what a charming exit a Frenchman would
have made under similar circumstances! With what exquisite courtesy he
would have masked his triumph!... But, God bless me, Ganimard, what are
you doing? Making a search? Come, what’s the use? There is nothing
left—not even a scrap of paper. I assure you my archives are in a safe
place.”

“I am not so sure of that,” replied Ganimard. “I must search
everything.”

Lupin submitted to the operation. Held by two detectives and surrounded
by the others, he patiently endured the proceedings for twenty minutes,
then he said:

“Hurry up, Ganimard, and finish!”

“You are in a hurry.”

“Of course I am. An important appointment.”

“At the police station?”

“No; in the city.”

“Ah! at what time?”

“Two o’clock.”

“It is three o’clock now.”

“Just so; I will be late. And punctuality is one of my virtues.”

“Well, give me five minutes.”

“Not a second more,” said Lupin.

“I am doing my best to expedite——”

“Oh! don’t talk so much.... Still searching that cupboard? It is
empty.”

“Here are some letters.”

“Old invoices, I presume!”

“No; a packet tied with a ribbon.”

“A red ribbon? Oh! Ganimard, for God’s sake, don’t untie it!”

“From a woman?”

“Yes.”

“A woman of the world?”

“The best in the world.”

“Her name?”

“Madame Ganimard.”

“Very funny! very funny!” exclaimed the detective.

At that moment the men, who had been sent to search the other rooms,
returned and announced their failure to find anything. Lupin laughed
and said:

“Parbleu! Did you expect to find my visiting list, or evidence of my
business relations with the Emperor of Germany? But I can tell you what
you should investigate, Ganimard: All the little mysteries of this
apartment. For instance, that gas-pipe is a speaking tube. That chimney
contains a stairway. That wall is hollow. And the marvellous system of
bells! Ah! Ganimard, just press that button!”

Ganimard obeyed.

“Did you hear anything?” asked Lupin.

“No.”

“Neither did I. And yet you notified my aeronaut to prepare the
dirigible balloon which will soon carry us into the clouds.”

“Come!” said Ganimard, who had completed his search; “we’ve had enough
nonsense—let’s be off.”

He started away, followed by his men. Lupin did not move. His guardians
pushed him in vain.

“Well,” said Ganimard, “do you refuse to go?”

“Not at all. But it depends.”

“On what?”

“Where you want to take me.”

“To the station-house, of course.”

“Then I refuse to go. I have no business there.”

“Are you crazy?”

“Did I not tell you that I had an important appointment?”

“Lupin!”

“Why, Ganimard, I have an appointment with the blonde Lady, and do you
suppose I would be so discourteous as to cause her a moment’s anxiety?
That would be very ungentlemanly.”

“Listen, Lupin,” said the detective, who was becoming annoyed by this
persiflage; “I have been very patient with you, but I will endure no
more. Follow me.”

“Impossible; I have an appointment and I shall keep it.”

“For the last time—follow me!”

“Im-pos-sible!”

At a sign from Ganimard two men seized Lupin by the arms; but they
released him at once, uttering cries of pain. Lupin had thrust two long
needles into them. The other men now rushed at Lupin with cries of rage
and hatred, eager to avenge their comrades and to avenge themselves for
the many affronts he had heaped upon them; and now they struck and beat
him to their heart’s desire. A violent blow on the temple felled Lupin
to the floor.

“If you hurt him you will answer to me,” growled Ganimard, in a rage.

He leaned over Lupin to ascertain his condition. Then, learning that he
was breathing freely, Ganimard ordered his men to carry the prisoner by
the head and feet, while he himself supported the body.

“Go gently, now!... Don’t jolt him. Ah! the brutes would have killed
him.... Well, Lupin, how goes it?”

“None too well, Ganimard ... you let them knock me out.”

“It was your own fault; you were so obstinate,” replied Ganimard. “But
I hope they didn’t hurt you.”

They had left the apartment and were now on the landing. Lupin groaned
and stammered:

“Ganimard ... the elevator ... they are breaking my bones.”

“A good idea, an excellent idea,” replied Ganimard. “Besides, the
stairway is too narrow.”

He summoned the elevator. They placed Lupin on the seat with the
greatest care. Ganimard took his place beside him and said to his men:

“Go down the stairs and wait for me below. Understand?”

Ganimard closed the door of the elevator. Suddenly the elevator shot
upward like a balloon released from its cable. Lupin burst into a fit
of sardonic laughter.

“Good God!” cried Ganimard, as he made a frantic search in the dark for
the button of descent. Having found it, he cried:

“The fifth floor! Watch the door of the fifth floor.”

His assistants clambered up the stairs, two and three steps at a time.
But this strange circumstance happened: The elevator seemed to break
through the ceiling of the last floor, disappeared from the sight of
Ganimard’s assistants, suddenly made its appearance on the upper
floor—the servants’ floor—and stopped. Three men were there waiting for
it. They opened the door. Two of them seized Ganimard, who, astonished
at the sudden attack, scarcely made any defence. The other man carried
off Lupin.

“I warned you, Ganimard ... about the dirigible balloon. Another time,
don’t be so tender-hearted. And, moreover, remember that Arsène Lupin
doesn’t allow himself to be struck and knocked down without sufficient
reason. Adieu.”

The door of the elevator was already closed on Ganimard, and the
machine began to descend; and it all happened so quickly that the old
detective reached the ground floor as soon as his assistants. Without
exchanging a word they crossed the court and ascended the servants’
stairway, which was the only way to reach the servants’ floor through
which the escape had been made.

A long corridor with several turns and bordered with little numbered
rooms led to a door that was not locked. On the other side of this door
and, therefore, in another house there was another corridor with
similar turns and similar rooms, and at the end of it a servants’
stairway. Ganimard descended it, crossed a court and a vestibule and
found himself in the rue Picot. Then he understood the situation: the
two houses, built the entire depth of the lots, touched at the rear,
while the fronts of the houses faced upon two streets that ran parallel
to each other at a distance of more than sixty metres apart.

He found the concierge and, showing his card, enquired:

“Did four men pass here just now?”

“Yes; the two servants from the fourth and fifth floors, with two
friends.”

“Who lives on the fourth and fifth floors?”

“Two men named Fauvel and their cousins, whose name is Provost. They
moved to-day, leaving the two servants, who went away just now.”

“Ah!” thought Ganimard; “what a grand opportunity we have missed! The
entire band lived in these houses.”

And he sank down on a chair in despair.


Forty minutes later two gentlemen were driven up to the station of the
Northern Railway and hurried to the Calais express, followed by a
porter who carried their valises. One of them had his arm in a sling,
and the pallor of his face denoted some illness. The other man was in a
jovial mood.

“We must hurry, Wilson, or we will miss the train.... Ah! Wilson, I
shall never forget these ten days.”

“Neither will I.”

“Ah! it was a great struggle!”

“Superb!”

“A few repulses, here and there—”

“Of no consequence.”

“And, at last, victory all along the line. Lupin arrested! The blue
diamond recovered!”

“My arm broken!”

“What does a broken arm count for in such a victory as that?”

“Especially when it is my arm.”

“Ah! yes, don’t you remember, Wilson, that it was at the very time you
were in the pharmacy, suffering like a hero, that I discovered the clue
to the whole mystery?”

“How lucky!”

The doors of the carriages were being closed.

“All aboard. Hurry up, gentlemen!”

The porter climbed into an empty compartment and placed their valises
in the rack, whilst Sholmes assisted the unfortunate Wilson.

“What’s the matter, Wilson? You’re not done up, are you? Come, pull
your nerves together.”

“My nerves are all right.”

“Well, what is it, then?”

“I have only one hand.”

“What of it?” exclaimed Sholmes, cheerfully. “You are not the only one
who has had a broken arm. Cheer up!”

Sholmes handed the porter a piece of fifty centimes.

“Thank you, Monsieur Sholmes,” said the porter.

The Englishman looked at him; it was Arsène Lupin.

“You!... you!” he stammered, absolutely astounded.

And Wilson brandished his sound arm in the manner of a man who
demonstrates a fact as he said:

“You! you! but you were arrested! Sholmes told me so. When he left you
Ganimard and thirty men had you in charge.”

Lupin folded his arms and said, with an air of indignation:

“Did you suppose I would let you go away without bidding you adieu?
After the very friendly relations that have always existed between us!
That would be discourteous and ungrateful on my part.”

The train whistled. Lupin continued:

“I beg your pardon, but have you everything you need? Tobacco and
matches ... yes ... and the evening papers? You will find in them an
account of my arrest—your last exploit, Monsieur Sholmes. And now, au
revoir. Am delighted to have made your acquaintance. And if ever I can
be of any service to you, I shall be only too happy....” He leaped to
the platform and closed the door.

“Adieu,” he repeated, waving his handkerchief. “Adieu.... I shall write
to you.... You will write also, eh? And your arm broken, Wilson.... I
am truly sorry.... I shall expect to hear from both of you. A postal
card, now and then, simply address: Lupin, Paris. That is
sufficient.... Adieu.... See you soon.”




CHAPTER VII.
THE JEWISH LAMP.


Herlock Sholmes and Wilson were sitting in front of the fireplace, in
comfortable armchairs, with the feet extended toward the grateful
warmth of a glowing coke fire.

Sholmes’ pipe, a short brier with a silver band, had gone out. He
knocked out the ashes, filled it, lighted it, pulled the skirts of his
dressing-gown over his knees, and drew from his pipe great puffs of
smoke, which ascended toward the ceiling in scores of shadow rings.

Wilson gazed at him, as a dog lying curled up on a rug before the fire
might look at his master, with great round eyes which have no hope
other than to obey the least gesture of his owner. Was the master going
to break the silence? Would he reveal to Wilson the subject of his
reverie and admit his satellite into the charmed realm of his thoughts?

When Sholmes had maintained his silent attitude for some time. Wilson
ventured to speak:

“Everything seems quiet now. Not the shadow of a case to occupy our
leisure moments.”

Sholmes did not reply, but the rings of smoke emitted by Sholmes were
better formed, and Wilson observed that his companion drew considerable
pleasure from that trifling fact—an indication that the great man was
not absorbed in any serious meditation. Wilson, discouraged, arose and
went to the window.

The lonely street extended between the gloomy façades of grimy houses,
unusually gloomy this morning by reason of a heavy downfall of rain. A
cab passed; then another. Wilson made an entry of their numbers in his
memorandum-book. One never knows!

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “the postman.”

The man entered, shown in by the servant.

“Two registered letters, sir ... if you will sign, please?”

Sholmes signed the receipts, accompanied the man to the door, and was
opening one of the letters as he returned.

“It seems to please you,” remarked Wilson, after a moment’s silence.

“This letter contains a very interesting proposition. You are anxious
for a case—here’s one. Read——”

Wilson read:

“Monsieur,
    “I desire the benefit of your services and experience. I have been
    the victim of a serious theft, and the investigation has as yet
    been unsuccessful. I am sending to you by this mail a number of
    newspapers which will inform you of the affair, and if you will
    undertake the case, I will place my house at your disposal and ask
    you to fill in the enclosed check, signed by me, for whatever sum
    you require for your expenses.
    “Kindly reply by telegraph, and much oblige,


“Your humble servant,
“Baron Victor d’Imblevalle,
“18 rue Murillo, Paris.”


“Ah!” exclaimed Sholmes, “that sounds good ... a little trip to Paris
... and why not, Wilson? Since my famous duel with Arsène Lupin, I have
not had an excuse to go there. I should be pleased to visit the capital
of the world under less strenuous conditions.”

He tore the check into four pieces and, while Wilson, whose arm had not
yet regained its former strength, uttered bitter words against Paris
and the Parisians, Sholmes opened the second envelope. Immediately, he
made a gesture of annoyance, and a wrinkle appeared on his forehead
during the reading of the letter; then, crushing the paper into a ball,
he threw it, angrily, on the floor.

“Well? What’s the matter?” asked Wilson, anxiously.

He picked up the ball of paper, unfolded it, and read, with increasing
amazement:

“My Dear Monsieur:
    “You know full well the admiration I have for you and the interest
    I take in your renown. Well, believe me, when I warn you to have
    nothing whatever to do with the case on which you have just now
    been called to Paris. Your intervention will cause much harm; your
    efforts will produce a most lamentable result; and you will be
    obliged to make a public confession of your defeat.
    “Having a sincere desire to spare you such humiliation, I implore
    you, in the name of the friendship that unites us, to remain
    peacefully reposing at your own fireside.
    “My best wishes to Monsieur Wilson, and, for yourself, the sincere
    regards of your devoted


ARSÈNE LUPIN.”


“Arsène Lupin!” repeated Wilson, astounded.

Sholmes struck the table with his fist, and exclaimed:

“Ah! he is pestering me already, the fool! He laughs at me as if I were
a schoolboy! The public confession of my defeat! Didn’t I force him to
disgorge the blue diamond?”

“I tell you—he’s afraid,” suggested Wilson.

“Nonsense! Arsène Lupin is not afraid, and this taunting letter proves
it.”

“But how did he know that the Baron d’Imblevalle had written to you?”

“What do I know about it? You do ask some stupid questions, my boy.”

“I thought ... I supposed——”

“What? That I am a clairvoyant? Or a sorcerer?”

“No, but I have seen you do some marvellous things.”

“No person can perform _marvellous_ things. I no more than you. I
reflect, I deduct, I conclude—that is all; but I do not divine. Only
fools divine.”

Wilson assumed the attitude of a whipped cur, and resolved not to make
a fool of himself by trying to divine why Sholmes paced the room with
quick, nervous strides. But when Sholmes rang for the servant and
ordered his valise, Wilson thought that he was in possession of a
material fact which gave him the right to reflect, deduct and conclude
that his associate was about to take a journey. The same mental
operation permitted him to assert, with almost mathematical exactness:

“Sholmes, you are going to Paris.”

“Possibly.”

“And Lupin’s affront impels you to go, rather than the desire to assist
the Baron d’Imblevalle.”

“Possibly.”

“Sholmes, I shall go with you.”

“Ah; ah! my old friend,” exclaimed Sholmes, interrupting his walking,
“you are not afraid that your right arm will meet the same fate as your
left?”

“What can happen to me? You will be there.”

“That’s the way to talk, Wilson. We will show that clever Frenchman
that he made a mistake when he threw his glove in our faces. Be quick,
Wilson, we must catch the first train.”

“Without waiting for the papers the baron has sent you?”

“What good are they?”

“I will send a telegram.”

“No; if you do that, Arsène Lupin will know of my arrival. I wish to
avoid that. This time, Wilson, we must fight under cover.”


That afternoon, the two friends embarked at Dover. The passage was a
delightful one. In the train from Calais to Paris, Sholmes had three
hours sound sleep, while Wilson guarded the door of the compartment.

Sholmes awoke in good spirits. He was delighted at the idea of another
duel with Arsène Lupin, and he rubbed his hands with the satisfied air
of a man who looks forward to a pleasant vacation.

“At last!” exclaimed Wilson, “we are getting to work again.”

And he rubbed his hands with the same satisfied air.

At the station, Sholmes took the wraps and, followed by Wilson, who
carried the valises, he gave up his tickets and started off briskly.

“Fine weather, Wilson.... Blue sky and sunshine! Paris is giving us a
royal reception.”

“Yes, but what a crowd!”

“So much the better, Wilson, we will pass unnoticed. No one will
recognize us in such a crowd.”

“Is this Monsieur Sholmes?”

He stopped, somewhat puzzled. Who the deuce could thus address him by
his name? A woman stood beside him; a young girl whose simple dress
outlined her slender form and whose pretty face had a sad and anxious
expression. She repeated her enquiry:

“You are Monsieur Sholmes?”

As he still remained silent, as much from confusion as from a habit of
prudence, the girl asked a third time:

“Have I the honor of addressing Monsieur Sholmes?”

“What do you want?” he replied, testily, considering the incident a
suspicious one.

“You must listen to me, Monsieur Sholmes, as it is a serious matter. I
know that you are going to the rue Murillo.”

“What do you say?”

“I know ... I know ... rue Murillo ... number 18. Well, you must not go
... no, you must not. I assure you that you will regret it. Do not
think that I have any interest in the matter. I do it because it is
right ... because my conscience tells me to do it.”

Sholmes tried to get away, but she persisted:

“Oh! I beg of you, don’t neglect my advice.... Ah! if I only knew how
to convince you! Look at me! Look into my eyes! They are sincere ...
they speak the truth.”

She gazed at Sholmes, fearlessly but innocently, with those beautiful
eyes, serious and clear, in which her very soul seemed to be reflected.

Wilson nodded his head, as he said:

“Mademoiselle looks honest.”

“Yes,” she implored, “and you must have confidence——”

“I have confidence in you, mademoiselle,” replied Wilson.

“Oh, how happy you make me! And so has your friend? I feel it ... I am
sure of it! What happiness! Everything will be all right now!... What a
good idea of mine!... Ah! yes, there is a train for Calais in twenty
minutes. You will take it.... Quick, follow me ... you must come this
way ... there is just time.”

She tried to drag them along. Sholmes seized her arm, and in as gentle
a voice as he could assume, said to her:

“Excuse me, mademoiselle, if I cannot yield to your wishes, but I never
abandon a task that I have once undertaken.”

“I beseech you ... I implore you.... Ah if you could only understand!”

Sholmes passed outside and walked away at a quick pace. Wilson said to
the girl:

“Have no fear ... he will be in at the finish. He never failed yet.”

And he ran to overtake Sholmes.

HERLOCK SHOLMES—ARSÈNE LUPIN.

These words, in great black letters, met their gaze as soon as they
left the railway station. A number of sandwich-men were parading
through the street, one behind the other, carrying heavy canes with
iron ferrules with which they struck the pavement in harmony, and, on
their backs, they carried large posters, on which one could read the
following notice:

THE MATCH BETWEEN HERLOCK SHOLMES
AND ARSÈNE LUPIN. ARRIVAL OF THE ENGLISH
CHAMPION. THE GREAT DETECTIVE ATTACKS
THE MYSTERY OF THE RUE MURILLO. READ THE
DETAILS IN THE “ECHO DE FRANCE.”


Wilson shook his head, and said:

“Look at that, Sholmes, and we thought we were traveling incognito! I
shouldn’t be surprised to find the republican guard waiting for us at
the rue Murillo to give us an official reception with toasts and
champagne.”

“Wilson, when you get funny, you get beastly funny,” growled Sholmes.

Then he approached one of the sandwich-men with the obvious intention
of seizing him in his powerful grip and crushing him, together with his
infernal sign-board. There was quite a crowd gathered about the men,
reading the notices, and joking and laughing.

Repressing a furious access of rage, Sholmes said to the man:

“When did they hire you?”

“This morning.”

“How long have you been parading?”

“About an hour.”

“But the boards were ready before that?”

“Oh, yes, they were ready when we went to the agency this morning.”

So then it appears that Arsène Lupin had foreseen that he, Sholmes,
would accept the challenge. More than that, the letter written by Lupin
showed that he was eager for the fray and that he was prepared to
measure swords once more with his formidable rival. Why? What motive
could Arsène Lupin have in renewing the struggle?

Sholmes hesitated for a moment. Lupin must be very confident of his
success to show so much insolence in advance; and was not he, Sholmes,
falling into a trap by rushing into the battle at the first call for
help?

However, he called a carriage.

“Come, Wilson!... Driver, 18 rue Murillo!” he exclaimed, with an
outburst of his accustomed energy. With distended veins and clenched
fists, as if he were about to engage in a boxing bout, he jumped into
the carriage.


The rue Murillo is bordered with magnificent private residences, the
rear of which overlook the Parc Monceau. One of the most pretentious of
these houses is number 18, owned and occupied by the Baron d’Imblevalle
and furnished in a luxurious manner consistent with the owner’s taste
and wealth. There was a courtyard in front of the house, and, in the
rear, a garden well filled with trees whose branches mingle with those
of the park.

After ringing the bell, the two Englishmen were admitted, crossed the
courtyard, and were received at the door by a footman who showed them
into a small parlor facing the garden in the rear of the house. They
sat down and, glancing about, made a rapid inspection of the many
valuable objects with which the room was filled.

“Everything very choice,” murmured Wilson, “and in the best of taste.
It is a safe deduction to make that those who had the leisure to
collect these articles must now be at least fifty years of age.”

The door opened, and the Baron d’Imblevalle entered, followed by his
wife. Contrary to the deduction made by Wilson, they were both quite
young, of elegant appearance, and vivacious in speech and action. They
were profuse in their expressions of gratitude.

“So kind of you to come! Sorry to have caused you so much trouble! The
theft now seems of little consequence, since it has procured us this
pleasure.”

“How charming these French people are!” thought Wilson, evolving one of
his commonplace deductions.

“But time is money,” exclaimed the baron, “especially your time,
Monsieur Sholmes. So I will come to the point. Now, what do you think
of the affair? Do you think you can succeed in it?”

“Before I can answer that I must know what it is about.”

“I thought you knew.”

“No; so I must ask you for full particulars, even to the smallest
detail. First, what is the nature of the case?”

“A theft.”

“When did it take place?”

“Last Saturday,” replied the baron, “or, at least, some time during
Saturday night or Sunday morning.”

“That was six days ago. Now, you can tell me all about it.”

“In the first place, monsieur, I must tell you that my wife and I,
conforming to the manner of life that our position demands, go out very
little. The education of our children, a few receptions, and the care
and decoration of our house—such constitutes our life; and nearly all
our evenings are spent in this little room, which is my wife’s boudoir,
and in which we have gathered a few artistic objects. Last Saturday
night, about eleven o’clock, I turned off the electric lights, and my
wife and I retired, as usual, to our room.”

“Where is your room?”

“It adjoins this. That is the door. Next morning, that is to say,
Sunday morning, I arose quite early. As Suzanne, my wife, was still
asleep, I passed into the boudoir as quietly as possible so as not to
wake her. What was my astonishment when I found that window open—as we
had left it closed the evening before!”

“A servant——”

“No one enters here in the morning until we ring. Besides, I always
take the precaution to bolt the second door which communicates with the
ante-chamber. Therefore, the window must have been opened from the
outside. Besides, I have some evidence of that: the second pane of
glass from the right—close to the fastening—had been cut.”

“And what does that window overlook?”

“As you can see for yourself, it opens on a little balcony, surrounded
by a stone railing. Here, we are on the first floor, and you can see
the garden behind the house and the iron fence which separates it from
the Parc Monceau. It is quite certain that the thief came through the
park, climbed the fence by the aid of a ladder, and thus reached the
terrace below the window.”

“That is quite certain, you say?”

“Well, in the soft earth on either side of the fence, they found the
two holes made by the bottom of the ladder, and two similar holes can
be seen below the window. And the stone railing of the balcony shows
two scratches which were doubtless made by the contact of the ladder.”

“Is the Parc Monceau closed at night?”

“No; but if it were, there is a house in course of erection at number
14, and a person could enter that way.”

Herlock Sholmes reflected for a few minutes, and then said:

“Let us come down to the theft. It must have been committed in this
room?”

“Yes; there was here, between that twelfth century Virgin and that
tabernacle of chased silver, a small Jewish lamp. It has disappeared.”

“And is that all?”

“That is all.”

“Ah!... And what is a Jewish lamp?”

“One of those copper lamps used by the ancient Jews, consisting of a
standard which supported a bowl containing the oil, and from this bowl
projected several burners intended for the wicks.”

“Upon the whole, an object of small value.”

“No great value, of course. But this one contained a secret
hiding-place in which we were accustomed to place a magnificent jewel,
a chimera in gold, set with rubies and emeralds, which was of great
value.”

“Why did you hide it there?”

“Oh! I can’t give any reason, monsieur, unless it was an odd fancy to
utilize a hiding-place of that kind.”

“Did anyone know it?”

“No.”

“No one—except the thief,” said Sholmes. “Otherwise he would not have
taken the trouble to steal the lamp.”

“Of course. But how could he know it, as it was only by accident that
the secret mechanism of the lamp was revealed to us.”

“A similar accident has revealed it to some one else ... a servant ...
or an acquaintance. But let us proceed: I suppose the police have been
notified?”

“Yes. The examining magistrate has completed his investigation. The
reporter-detectives attached to the leading newspapers have also made
their investigations. But, as I wrote to you, it seems to me the
mystery will never be solved.”

Sholmes arose, went to the window, examined the casement, the balcony,
the terrace, studied the scratches on the stone railing with his
magnifying-glass, and then requested Mon. d’Imblevalle to show him the
garden.

Outside, Sholmes sat down in a rattan chair and gazed at the roof of
the house in a dreamy way. Then he walked over to the two little wooden
boxes with which they had covered the holes made in the ground by the
bottom of the ladder with a view of preserving them intact. He raised
the boxes, kneeled on the ground, scrutinized the holes and made some
measurements. After making a similar examination of the holes near the
fence, he and the baron returned to the boudoir where Madame
d’Imblevalle was waiting for them. After a short silence Sholmes said:

“At the very outset of your story, baron, I was surprised at the very
simple methods employed by the thief. To raise a ladder, cut a
window-pane, select a valuable article, and walk out again—no, that is
not the way such things are done. All that is too plain, too simple.”

“Well, what do you think?”

“That the Jewish lamp was stolen under the direction of Arsène Lupin.”

“Arsène Lupin!” exclaimed the baron.

“Yes, but he did not do it himself, as no one came from the outside.
Perhaps a servant descended from the upper floor by means of a
waterspout that I noticed when I was in the garden.”

“What makes you think so?”

“Arsène Lupin would not leave this room empty-handed.”

“Empty-handed! But he had the lamp.”

“But that would not have prevented his taking that snuff-box, set with
diamonds, or that opal necklace. When he leaves anything, it is because
he can’t carry it away.”

“But the marks of the ladder outside?”

“A false scent. Placed there simply to avert suspicion.”

“And the scratches on the balustrade?”

“A farce! They were made with a piece of sandpaper. See, here are
scraps of the paper that I picked up in the garden.”

“And what about the marks made by the bottom of the ladder?”

“Counterfeit! Examine the two rectangular holes below the window, and
the two holes near the fence. They are of a similar form, but I find
that the two holes near the house are closer to each other than the two
holes near the fence. What does that fact suggest? To me, it suggested
that the four holes were made by a piece of wood prepared for the
purpose.”

“The better proof would be the piece of wood itself.”

“Here it is,” said Sholmes, “I found it in the garden, under the box of
a laurel tree.”

The baron bowed to Sholmes in recognition of his skill. Only forty
minutes had elapsed since the Englishman had entered the house, and he
had already exploded all the theories theretofore formed, and which had
been based on what appeared to be obvious and undeniable facts. But
what now appeared to be the real facts of the case rested upon a more
solid foundation, to-wit, the astute reasoning of a Herlock Sholmes.

“The accusation which you make against one of our household is a very
serious matter,” said the baroness. “Our servants have been with us a
long time and none of them would betray our trust.”

“If none of them has betrayed you, how can you explain the fact that I
received this letter on the same day and by the same mail as the letter
you wrote to me?”

He handed to the baroness the letter that he had received from Arsène
Lupin. She exclaimed, in amazement:

“Arsène Lupin! How could he know?”

“Did you tell anyone that you had written to me?”

“No one,” replied the baron. “The idea occurred to us the other evening
at the dinner-table.”

“Before the servants?”

“No, only our two children. Oh, no ... Sophie and Henriette had left
the table, hadn’t they, Suzanne?”

Madame d’Imblevalle, after a moment’s reflection, replied:

“Yes, they had gone to Mademoiselle.”

“Mademoiselle?” queried Sholmes.

“The governess, Mademoiselle Alice Demun.”

“Does she take her meals with you?”

“No. Her meals are served in her room.”

Wilson had an idea. He said:

“The letter written to my friend Herlock Sholmes was posted?”

“Of course.”

“Who posted it?”

“Dominique, who has been my valet for twenty years,” replied the baron.
“Any search in that direction would be a waste of time.”

“One never wastes his time when engaged in a search,” said Wilson,
sententiously.

This preliminary investigation now ended, and Sholmes asked permission
to retire.

At dinner, an hour later, he saw Sophie and Henriette, the two children
of the family, one was six and the other eight years of age. There was
very little conversation at the table. Sholmes responded to the
friendly advances of his hosts in such a curt manner that they were
soon reduced to silence. When the coffee was served, Sholmes swallowed
the contents of his cup, and rose to take his leave.

At that moment, a servant entered with a telephone message addressed to
Sholmes. He opened it, and read:

“You have my enthusiastic admiration. The results attained by you in so
short a time are simply marvellous. I am dismayed.


“ARSÈNE LUPIN.”


Sholmes made a gesture of indignation and handed the message to the
baron, saying:

“What do you think now, monsieur? Are the walls of your house furnished
with eyes and ears?”

“I don’t understand it,” said the baron, in amazement.

“Nor do I; but I do understand that Lupin has knowledge of everything
that occurs in this house. He knows every movement, every word. There
is no doubt of it. But how does he get his information? That is the
first mystery I have to solve, and when I know that I will know
everything.”


That night, Wilson retired with the clear conscience of a man who has
performed his whole duty and thus acquired an undoubted right to sleep
and repose. So he fell asleep very quickly, and was soon enjoying the
most delightful dreams in which he pursued Lupin and captured him
single-handed; and the sensation was so vivid and exciting that it woke
him from his sleep. Someone was standing at his bedside. He seized his
revolver, and cried:

“Don’t move, Lupin, or I’ll fire.”

“The deuce! Wilson, what do you mean?”

“Oh! it is you, Sholmes. Do you want me?”

“I want to show you something. Get up.”

Sholmes led him to the window, and said:

“Look!... on the other side of the fence....”

“In the park?”

“Yes. What do you see?”

“I don’t see anything.”

“Yes, you do see something.”

“Ah! of course, a shadow ... two of them.”

“Yes, close to the fence. See, they are moving. Come, quick!”

Quickly they descended the stairs, and reached a room which opened into
the garden. Through the glass door they could see the two shadowy forms
in the same place.

“It is very strange,” said Sholmes, “but it seems to me I can hear a
noise inside the house.”

“Inside the house? Impossible! Everybody is asleep.”

“Well, listen——”

At that moment a low whistle came from the other side of the fence, and
they perceived a dim light which appeared to come from the house.

“The baron must have turned on the light in his room. It is just above
us.”

“That must have been the noise you heard,” said Wilson. “Perhaps they
are watching the fence also.”

Then there was a second whistle, softer than before.

“I don’t understand it; I don’t understand,” said Sholmes, irritably.

“No more do I,” confessed Wilson.

Sholmes turned the key, drew the bolt, and quietly opened the door. A
third whistle, louder than before, and modulated to another form. And
the noise above their heads became more pronounced. Sholmes said:

“It seems to be on the balcony outside the boudoir window.”

He put his head through the half-opened door, but immediately recoiled,
with a stifled oath. Then Wilson looked. Quite close to them there was
a ladder, the upper end of which was resting on the balcony.

“The deuce!” said Sholmes, “there is someone in the boudoir. That is
what we heard. Quick, let us remove the ladder.”

But at that instant a man slid down the ladder and ran toward the spot
where his accomplices were waiting for him outside the fence. He
carried the ladder with him. Sholmes and Wilson pursued the man and
overtook him just as he was placing the ladder against the fence. From
the other side of the fence two shots were fired.

“Wounded?” cried Sholmes.

“No,” replied Wilson.

Wilson seized the man by the body and tried to hold him, but the man
turned and plunged a knife into Wilson’s breast. He uttered a groan,
staggered and fell.

“Damnation!” muttered Sholmes, “if they have killed him I will kill
them.”

He laid Wilson on the grass and rushed toward the ladder. Too late—the
man had climbed the fence and, accompanied by his confederates, had
fled through the bushes.

“Wilson, Wilson, it is not serious, hein? Merely a scratch.”

The house door opened, and Monsieur d’Imblevalle appeared, followed by
the servants, carrying candles.

“What’s the matter?” asked the baron. “Is Monsieur Wilson wounded?”

“Oh! it’s nothing—a mere scratch,” repeated Sholmes, trying to deceive
himself.

The blood was flowing profusely, and Wilson’s face was livid. Twenty
minutes later the doctor ascertained that the point of the knife had
penetrated to within an inch and a half of the heart.

“An inch and a half of the heart! Wilson always was lucky!” said
Sholmes, in an envious tone.

“Lucky ... lucky....” muttered the doctor.

“Of course! Why, with his robust constitution he will soon be out
again.”

“Six weeks in bed and two months of convalescence.”

“Not more?”

“No, unless complications set in.”

“Oh! the devil! what does he want complications for?”

Fully reassured, Sholmes joined the baron in the boudoir. This time the
mysterious visitor had not exercised the same restraint. Ruthlessly, he
had laid his vicious hand upon the diamond snuff-box, upon the opal
necklace, and, in a general way, upon everything that could find a
place in the greedy pockets of an enterprising burglar.

The window was still open; one of the window-panes had been neatly cut;
and, in the morning, a summary investigation showed that the ladder
belonged to the house then in course of construction.

“Now, you can see,” said Mon. d’Imblevalle, with a touch of irony, “it
is an exact repetition of the affair of the Jewish lamp.”

“Yes, if we accept the first theory adopted by the police.”

“Haven’t you adopted it yet? Doesn’t this second theft shatter your
theory in regard to the first?”

“It only confirms it, monsieur.”

“That is incredible! You have positive evidence that last night’s theft
was committed by an outsider, and yet you adhere to your theory that
the Jewish lamp was stolen by someone in the house.”

“Yes, I am sure of it.”

“How do you explain it?”

“I do not explain anything, monsieur; I have established two facts
which do not appear to have any relation to each other, and yet I am
seeking the missing link that connects them.”

His conviction seemed to be so earnest and positive that the baron
submitted to it, and said:

“Very well, we will notify the police——”

“Not at all!” exclaimed the Englishman, quickly, “not at all! I intend
to ask for their assistance when I need it—but not before.”

“But the attack on your friend?”

“That’s of no consequence. He is only wounded. Secure the license of
the doctor. I shall be responsible for the legal side of the affair.”


The next two days proved uneventful. Yet Sholmes was investigating the
case with a minute care, and with a sense of wounded pride resulting
from that audacious theft, committed under his nose, in spite of his
presence and beyond his power to prevent it. He made a thorough
investigation of the house and garden, interviewed the servants, and
paid lengthy visits to the kitchen and stables. And, although his
efforts were fruitless, he did not despair.

“I will succeed,” he thought, “and the solution must be sought within
the walls of this house. This affair is quite different from that of
the blonde Lady, where I had to work in the dark, on unknown ground.
This time I am on the battlefield itself. The enemy is not the elusive
and invisible Lupin, but the accomplice, in flesh and blood, who lives
and moves within the confines of this house. Let me secure the
slightest clue and the game is mine!”

That clue was furnished to him by accident.

On the afternoon of the third day, when he entered a room located above
the boudoir, which served as a study for the children, he found
Henriette, the younger of the two sisters. She was looking for her
scissors.

“You know,” she said to Sholmes, “I make papers like that you received
the other evening.”

“The other evening?”

“Yes, just as dinner was over, you received a paper with marks on it
... you know, a telegram.... Well, I make them, too.”

She left the room. To anyone else these words would seem to be nothing
more than the insignificant remark of a child, and Sholmes himself
listened to them with a distracted air and continued his investigation.
But, suddenly, he ran after the child, and overtook her at the head of
the stairs. He said to her:

“So you paste stamps and marks on papers?”

Henriette, very proudly, replied:

“Yes, I cut them out and paste them on.”

“Who taught you that little game?”

“Mademoiselle ... my governess ... I have seen her do it often. She
takes words out of the newspapers and pastes them——”

“What does she make out of them?”

“Telegrams and letters that she sends away.”

Herlock Sholmes returned to the study, greatly puzzled by the
information and seeking to draw from it a logical deduction. There was
a pile of newspapers on the mantel. He opened them and found that many
words and, in some places, entire lines had been cut out. But, after
reading a few of the word’s which preceded or followed, he decided that
the missing words had been cut out at random—probably by the child. It
was possible that one of the newspapers had been cut by mademoiselle;
but how could he assure himself that such was the case?

Mechanically, Sholmes turned over the school-books on the table; then
others which were lying on the shelf of a bookcase. Suddenly he uttered
a cry of joy. In a corner of the bookcase, under a pile of old exercise
books, he found a child’s alphabet-book, in which the letters were
ornamented with pictures, and on one of the pages of that book he
discovered a place where a word had been removed. He examined it. It
was a list of the days of the week. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, etc.
The word “Saturday” was missing. Now, the theft of the Jewish lamp had
occurred on a Saturday night.

Sholmes experienced that slight fluttering of the heart which always
announced to him, in the clearest manner, that he had discovered the
road which leads to victory. That ray of truth, that feeling of
certainty, never deceived him.

With nervous fingers he hastened to examine the balance of the book.
Very soon he made another discovery. It was a page composed of capital
letters, followed by a line of figures. Nine of those letters and three
of those figures had been carefully cut out. Sholmes made a list of the
missing letters and figures in his memorandum book, in alphabetical and
numerical order, and obtained the following result:

CDEHNOPEZ—237.

“Well? at first sight, it is a rather formidable puzzle,” he murmured,
“but, by transposing the letters and using all of them, is it possible
to form one, two or three complete words?”

Sholmes tried it, in vain.

Only one solution seemed possible; it constantly appeared before him,
no matter which way he tried to juggle the letters, until, at length,
he was satisfied it was the true solution, since it harmonized with the
logic of the facts and the general circumstances of the case.

As that page of the book did not contain any duplicate letters it was
probable, in fact quite certain, that the words he could form from
those letters would be incomplete, and that the original words had been
completed with letters taken from other pages. Under those conditions
he obtained the following solution, errors and omissions excepted:

REPOND Z—CH—237.

The first word was quite clear: répondez [reply], a letter E is missing
because it occurs twice in the word, and the book furnished only one
letter of each kind.

As to the second incomplete word, no doubt it formed, with the aid of
the number 237, an address to which the reply was to be sent. They
appointed Saturday as the time, and requested a reply to be sent to the
address CH. 237.

Or, perhaps, CH. 237 was an address for a letter to be sent to the
“general delivery” of some postoffice, or, again, they might form a
part of some incomplete word. Sholmes searched the book once more, but
did not discover that any other letters had been removed. Therefore,
until further orders, he decided to adhere to the foregoing
interpretation.

Henriette returned and observed what he was doing.

“Amusing, isn’t it?”

“Yes, very amusing,” he replied. “But, have you any other papers?...
Or, rather, words already cut out that I can paste?”

“Papers?... No.... And Mademoiselle wouldn’t like it.”

“Mademoiselle?”

“Yes, she has scolded me already.”

“Why?”

“Because I have told you some things ... and she says that a person
should never tell things about those they love.”

“You are quite right.”

Henriette was delighted to receive his approbation, in fact so highly
pleased that she took from a little silk bag that was pinned to her
dress some scraps of cloth, three buttons, two cubes of sugar and,
lastly, a piece of paper which she handed to Sholmes.

“See, I give it to you just the same.”

It was the number of a cab—8,279.

“Where did this number come from?”

“It fell out of her pocketbook.”

“When?”

“Sunday, at mass, when she was taking out some sous for the
collection.”

“Exactly! And now I shall tell you how to keep from being scolded
again. Do not tell Mademoiselle that you saw me.”

Sholmes then went to Mon. d’Imblevalle and questioned him in regard to
Mademoiselle. The baron replied, indignantly:

“Alice Demun! How can you imagine such a thing? It is utterly
impossible!”

“How long has she been in your service?”

“Only a year, but there is no one in the house in whom I have greater
confidence.”

“Why have I not seen her yet?”

“She has been away for a few days.”

“But she is here now.”

“Yes; since her return she has been watching at the bedside of your
friend. She has all the qualities of a nurse ... gentle ... thoughtful
... Monsieur Wilson seems much pleased....”

“Ah!” said Sholmes, who had completely neglected to inquire about his
friend. After a moment’s reflection he asked:

“Did she go out on Sunday morning?”

“The day after the theft?”

“Yes.”

The baron called his wife and asked her. She replied:

“Mademoiselle went to the eleven o’clock mass with the children, as
usual.”

“But before that?”

“Before that? No.... Let me see!... I was so upset by the theft ... but
I remember now that, on the evening before, she asked permission to go
out on Sunday morning ... to see a cousin who was passing through
Paris, I think. But, surely, you don’t suspect her?”

“Of course not ... but I would like to see her.”

He went to Wilson’s room. A woman dressed in a gray cloth dress, as in
the hospitals, was bending over the invalid, giving him a drink. When
she turned her face Sholmes recognized her as the young girl who had
accosted him at the railway station.

Alice Demun smiled sweetly; her great serious, innocent eyes showed no
sign of embarrassment. The Englishman tried to speak, muttered a few
syllables, and stopped. Then she resumed her work, acting quite
naturally under Sholmes’ astonished gaze, moved the bottles, unrolled
and rolled cotton bandages, and again regarded Sholmes with her
charming smile of pure innocence.

He turned on his heels, descended the stairs, noticed Mon.
d’Imblevalle’s automobile in the courtyard, jumped into it, and went to
Levallois, to the office of the cab company whose address was printed
on the paper he had received from Henriette. The man who had driven
carriage number 8,279 on Sunday morning not being there, Sholmes
dismissed the automobile and waited for the man’s return. He told
Sholmes that he had picked up a woman in the vicinity of the Parc
Monceau, a young woman dressed in black, wearing a heavy veil, and,
apparently, quite nervous.

“Did she have a package?”

“Yes, quite a long package.”

“Where did you take her?”

“Avenue des Ternes, corner of the Place Saint-Ferdinand. She remained
there about ten minutes, and then returned to the Parc Monceau.”

“Could you recognize the house in the avenue des Ternes?”

“Parbleu! Shall I take you there?”

“Presently. First take me to 36 quai des Orfèvres.”

At the police office he saw Detective Ganimard.

“Monsieur Ganimard, are you at liberty?”

“If it has anything to do with Lupin—no!”

“It has something to do with Lupin.”

“Then I do not go.”

“What! you surrender——”

“I bow to the inevitable. I am tired of the unequal struggle, in which
we are sure to be defeated. Lupin is stronger than I am—stronger than
the two of us; therefore, we must surrender.”

“I will not surrender.”

“He will make you, as he has all others.”

“And you would be pleased to see it—eh, Ganimard?”

“At all events, it is true,” said Ganimard, frankly. “And since you are
determined to pursue the game, I will go with you.”

Together they entered the carriage and were driven to the avenue des
Ternes. Upon their order the carriage stopped on the other side of the
street, at some distance from the house, in front of a little café, on
the terrace of which the two men took seats amongst the shrubbery. It
was commencing to grow dark.

“Waiter,” said Sholmes, “some writing material.”

He wrote a note, recalled the waiter and gave him the letter with
instructions to deliver it to the concierge of the house which he
pointed out.

In a few minutes the concierge stood before them. Sholmes asked him if,
on the Sunday morning, he had seen a young woman dressed in black.

“In black? Yes, about nine o’clock. She went to the second floor.”

“Have you seen her often?”

“No, but for some time—well, during the last few weeks, I have seen her
almost every day.”

“And since Sunday?”

“Only once ... until to-day.”

“What! Did she come to-day?”

“She is here now.”

“Here now?”

“Yes, she came about ten minutes ago. Her carriage is standing in the
Place Saint-Ferdinand, as usual. I met her at the door.”

“Who is the occupant of the second floor?”

“There are two: a modiste, Mademoiselle Langeais, and a gentleman who
rented two furnished rooms a month ago under the name of Bresson.”

“Why do you say ‘under the name’?”

“Because I have an idea that it is an assumed name. My wife takes care
of his rooms, and ... well, there are not two shirts there with the
same initials.”

“Is he there much of the time?”

“No; he is nearly always out. He has not been here for three days.”

“Was he here on Saturday night?”

“Saturday night?... Let me think.... Yes, Saturday night, he came in
and stayed all night.”

“What sort of a man is he?”

“Well, I can scarcely answer that. He is so changeable. He is, by
turns, big, little, fat, thin ... dark and light. I do not always
recognize him.”

Ganimard and Sholmes exchanged looks.

“That is he, all right,” said Ganimard.

“Ah!” said the concierge, “there is the girl now.”

Mademoiselle had just emerged from the house and was walking toward her
carriage in the Place Saint-Ferdinand.

“And there is Monsieur Bresson.”

“Monsieur Bresson? Which is he?”

“The man with the parcel under his arm.”

“But he is not looking after the girl. She is going to her carriage
alone.”

“Yes, I have never seen them together.”

The two detectives had arisen. By the light of the street-lamps they
recognized the form of Arsène Lupin, who had started off in a direction
opposite to that taken by the girl.

“Which will you follow?” asked Ganimard.

“I will follow him, of course. He’s the biggest game.”

“Then I will follow the girl,” proposed Ganimard.

“No, no,” said Sholmes, quickly, who did not wish to disclose the
girl’s identity to Ganimard, “I know where to find her. Come with me.”

They followed Lupin at a safe distance, taking care to conceal
themselves as well as possible amongst the moving throng and behind the
newspaper kiosks. They found the pursuit an easy one, as he walked
steadily forward without turning to the right or left, but with a
slight limp in the right leg, so slight as to require the keen eye of a
professional observer to detect it. Ganimard observed it, and said:

“He is pretending to be lame. Ah! if we could only collect two or three
policemen and pounce on our man! We run a chance to lose him.”

But they did not meet any policemen before they reached the Porte des
Ternes, and, having passed the fortifications, there was no prospect of
receiving any assistance.

“We had better separate,” said Sholmes, “as there are so few people on
the street.”

They were now on the Boulevard Victor-Hugo. They walked one on each
side of the street, and kept well in the shadow of the trees. They
continued thus for twenty minutes, when Lupin turned to the left and
followed the Seine. Very soon they saw him descend to the edge of the
river. He remained there only a few seconds, but they could not observe
his movements. Then Lupin retraced his steps. His pursuers concealed
themselves in the shadow of a gateway. Lupin passed in front of them.
His parcel had disappeared. And as he walked away another man emerged
from the shelter of a house and glided amongst the trees.

“He seems to be following him also,” said Sholmes, in a low voice.

The pursuit continued, but was now embarrassed by the presence of the
third man. Lupin returned the same way, passed through the Porte des
Ternes, and re-entered the house in the avenue des Ternes.

The concierge was closing the house for the night when Ganimard
presented himself.

“Did you see him?”

“Yes,” replied the concierge, “I was putting out the gas on the landing
when he closed and bolted his door.”

“Is there any person with him?”

“No; he has no servant. He never eats here.”

“Is there a servants’ stairway?”

“No.”

Ganimard said to Sholmes:

“I had better stand at the door of his room while you go for the
commissary of police in the rue Demours.”

“And if he should escape during that time?” said Sholmes.

“While I am here! He can’t escape.”

“One to one, with Lupin, is not an even chance for you.”

“Well, I can’t force the door. I have no right to do that, especially
at night.”

Sholmes shrugged his shoulders and said:

“When you arrest Lupin no one will question the methods by which you
made the arrest. However, let us go up and ring, and see what happens
then.”

They ascended to the second floor. There was a double door at the left
of the landing. Ganimard rang the bell. No reply. He rang again. Still
no reply.

“Let us go in,” said Sholmes.

“All right, come on,” replied Ganimard.

Yet, they stood still, irresolute. Like people who hesitate when they
ought to accomplish a decisive action they feared to move, and it
seemed to them impossible that Arsène Lupin was there, so close to
them, on the other side of that fragile door that could be broken down
by one blow of the fist. But they knew Lupin too well to suppose that
he would allow himself to be trapped in that stupid manner. No, no—a
thousand times, no—Lupin was no longer there. Through the adjoining
houses, over the roofs, by some conveniently prepared exit, he must
have already made his escape, and, once more, it would only be Lupin’s
shadow that they would seize.

They shuddered as a slight noise, coming from the other side of the
door, reached their ears. Then they had the impression, amounting
almost to a certainty, that he was there, separated from them by that
frail wooden door, and that he was listening to them, that he could
hear them.

What was to be done? The situation was a serious one. In spite of their
vast experience as detectives, they were so nervous and excited that
they thought they could hear the beating of their own hearts. Ganimard
questioned Sholmes by a look. Then he struck the door a violent blow
with his fist. Immediately they heard the sound of footsteps,
concerning which there was no attempt at concealment.

Ganimard shook the door. Then he and Sholmes, uniting their efforts,
rushed at the door, and burst it open with their shoulders. Then they
stood still, in surprise. A shot had been fired in the adjoining room.
Another shot, and the sound of a falling body.

When they entered they saw the man lying on the floor with his face
toward the marble mantel. His revolver had fallen from his hand.
Ganimard stooped and turned the man’s head. The face was covered with
blood, which was flowing from two wounds, one in the cheek, the other
in the temple.

“You can’t recognize him for blood.”

“No matter!” said Sholmes. “It is not Lupin.”

“How do you know? You haven’t even looked at him.”

“Do you think that Arsène Lupin is the kind of a man that would kill
himself?” asked Sholmes, with a sneer.

“But we thought we recognized him outside.”

“We thought so, because the wish was father to the thought. That man
has us bewitched.”

“Then it must be one of his accomplices.”

“The accomplices of Arsène Lupin do not kill themselves.”

“Well, then, who is it?”

They searched the corpse. In one pocket Herlock Sholmes found an empty
pocketbook; in another Ganimard found several louis. There were no
marks of identification on any part of his clothing. In a trunk and two
valises they found nothing but wearing apparel. On the mantel there was
a pile of newspapers. Ganimard opened them. All of them contained
articles referring to the theft of the Jewish lamp.

An hour later, when Ganimard and Sholmes left the house, they had
acquired no further knowledge of the strange individual who had been
driven to suicide by their untimely visit.

Who was he? Why had he killed himself? What was his connection with the
affair of the Jewish lamp? Who had followed him on his return from the
river? The situation involved many complex questions—many mysteries——


Herlock Sholmes went to bed in a very bad humor. Early next morning he
received the following telephonic message:

“Arsène Lupin has the honor to inform you of his tragic death in the
person of Monsieur Bresson, and requests the honor of your presence at
the funeral service and burial, which will be held at the public
expense on Thursday, 25 June.”




CHAPTER VIII.
THE SHIPWRECK.


“That’s what I don’t like, Wilson,” said Herlock Sholmes, after he had
read Arsène Lupin’s message; “that is what exasperates me in this
affair—to feel that the cunning, mocking eye of that fellow follows me
everywhere. He sees everything; he knows everything; he reads my inmost
thoughts; he even foresees my slightest movement. Ah! he is possessed
of a marvellous intuition, far surpassing that of the most instinctive
woman, yes, surpassing even that of Herlock Sholmes himself. Nothing
escapes him. I resemble an actor whose every step and movement are
directed by a stage-manager; who says this and does that in obedience
to a superior will. That is my position. Do you understand, Wilson?”

Certainly Wilson would have understood if his faculties had not been
deadened by the profound slumber of a man whose temperature varies
between one hundred and one hundred and three degrees. But whether he
heard or not was a matter of no consequence to Herlock Sholmes, who
continued:

“I have to concentrate all my energy and bring all my resources into
action in order to make the slightest progress. And, fortunately for
me, those petty annoyances are like so many pricks from a needle and
serve only to stimulate me. As soon as the heat of the wound is
appeased and the shock to my vanity has subsided I say to myself:
‘Amuse yourself, my dear fellow, but remember that he who laughs last
laughs best. Sooner or later you will betray yourself.’ For you know,
Wilson, it was Lupin himself, who, by his first dispatch and the
observation that it suggested to little Henriette, disclosed to me the
secret of his correspondence with Alice Hemun. Have you forgotten that
circumstance, dear boy?”

But Wilson was asleep; and Sholmes, pacing to and fro, resumed his
speech:

“And, now, things are not in a bad shape; a little obscure, perhaps,
but the light is creeping in. In the first place, I must learn all
about Monsieur Bresson. Ganimard and I will visit the bank of the
river, at the spot where Bresson threw away the package, and the
particular rôle of that gentleman will be known to me. After that the
game will be played between me and Alice Demun. Rather a light-weight
opponent, hein, Wilson? And do you not think that I will soon know the
phrase represented by the letters clipped from the alphabet-book, and
what the isolated letters—the ‘C’ and the ‘H’—mean? That is all I want
to know, Wilson.”

Mademoiselle entered at that moment, and, observing Sholmes
gesticulating, she said, in her sweetest manner:

“Monsieur Sholmes, I must scold you if you waken my patient. It isn’t
nice of you to disturb him. The doctor has ordered absolute rest.”

He looked at her in silence, astonished, as on their first meeting, at
her wonderful self-possession.

“Why do you look at me so, Monsieur Sholmes?... You seem to be trying
to read my thoughts.... No?... Then what is it?”

She questioned him with the most innocent expression on her pretty face
and in her frank blue eyes. A smile played upon her lips; and she
displayed so much unaffected candor that the Englishman almost lost his
temper. He approached her and said, in a low voice:

“Bresson killed himself last night.”

She affected not to understand him; so he repeated:

“Bresson killed himself yesterday....”

She did not show the slightest emotion; she acted as if the matter did
not concern or interest her in any way.

“You have been informed,” said Sholmes, displaying his annoyance.
“Otherwise, the news would have caused you to start, at least. Ah! you
are stronger than I expected. But what’s the use of your trying to
conceal anything from me?”

He picked up the alphabet-book, which he had placed on a convenient
table, and, opening it at the mutilated page, said:

“Will you tell me the order in which the missing letters should be
arranged in order to express the exact wording of the message you sent
to Bresson four days before the theft of the Jewish lamp?”

“The order?... Bresson?... the theft of the Jewish lamp?”

She repeated the words slowly, as if trying to grasp their meaning. He
continued:

“Yes. Here are the letters employed ... on this bit of paper.... What
did you say to Bresson?”

“The letters employed ... what did I say....”

Suddenly she burst into laughter:

“Ah! that is it! I understand! I am an accomplice in the crime! There
is a Monsieur Bresson who stole the Jewish lamp and who has now
committed suicide. And I am the friend of that gentleman. Oh! how
absurd you are!”

“Whom did you go to see last night on the second floor of a house in
the avenue des Ternes?”

“Who? My modiste, Mademoiselle Langeais. Do you suppose that my modiste
and my friend Monsieur Bresson are the same person?”

Despite all he knew, Sholmes was now in doubt. A person can feign
terror, joy, anxiety, in fact all emotions; but a person cannot feign
absolute indifference or light, careless laughter. Yet he continued to
question her:

“Why did you accost me the other evening at the Northern Railway
station? And why did you entreat me to leave Paris immediately without
investigating this theft?”

“Ah! you are too inquisitive, Monsieur Sholmes,” she replied, still
laughing in the most natural manner. “To punish you I will tell you
nothing, and, besides, you must watch the patient while I go to the
pharmacy on an urgent message. Au revoir.”

She left the room.

“I am beaten ... by a girl,” muttered Sholmes. “Not only did I get
nothing out of her but I exposed my hand and put her on her guard.”

And he recalled the affair of the blue diamond and his first interview
with Clotilde Destange. Had not the blonde Lady met his question with
the same unruffled serenity, and was he not once more face to face with
one of those creatures who, under the protection and influence of
Arsène Lupin, maintain the utmost coolness in the face of a terrible
danger?

“Sholmes ... Sholmes....”

It was Wilson who called him. Sholmes approached the bed, and, leaning
over, said:

“What’s the matter, Wilson? Does your wound pain you?”

Wilson’s lips moved, but he could not speak. At last, with a great
effort, he stammered:

“No ... Sholmes ... it is not she ... that is impossible——”

“Come, Wilson, what do you know about it? I tell you that it is she! It
is only when I meet one of Lupin’s creatures, prepared and instructed
by him, that I lose my head and make a fool of myself.... I bet you
that within an hour Lupin will know all about our interview. Within an
hour? What am I saying?... Why, he may know already. The visit to the
pharmacy ... urgent message. All nonsense!... She has gone to telephone
to Lupin.”

Sholmes left the house hurriedly, went down the avenue de Messine, and
was just in time to see Mademoiselle enter a pharmacy. Ten minutes
later she emerged from the shop carrying some small packages and a
bottle wrapped in white paper. But she had not proceeded far, when she
was accosted by a man who, with hat in hand and an obsequious air,
appeared to be asking for charity. She stopped, gave him something, and
proceeded on her way.

“She spoke to him,” said the Englishman to himself.

If not a certainty, it was at least an intuition, and quite sufficient
to cause him to change his tactics. Leaving the girl to pursue her own
course, he followed the suspected mendicant, who walked slowly to the
avenue des Ternes and lingered for a long time around the house in
which Bresson had lived, sometimes raising his eyes to the windows of
the second floor and watching the people who entered the house.

At the end of an hour he climbed to the top of a tramcar going in the
direction of Neuilly. Sholmes followed and took a seat behind the man,
and beside a gentleman who was concealed behind the pages of a
newspaper. At the fortifications the gentleman lowered the paper, and
Sholmes recognized Ganimard, who thereupon whispered, as he pointed to
the man in front:

“It is the man who followed Bresson last night. He has been watching
the house for an hour.”

“Anything new in regard to Bresson?” asked Sholmes.

“Yes, a letter came to his address this morning.”

“This morning? Then it was posted yesterday before the sender could
know of Bresson’s death.”

“Exactly. It is now in the possession of the examining magistrate. But
I read it. It says: _He will not accept any compromise. He wants
everything—the first thing as well as those of the second affair.
Otherwise he will proceed._”

“There is no signature,” added Ganimard. “It seems to me those few
lines won’t help us much.”

“I don’t agree with you, Monsieur Ganimard. To me those few lines are
very interesting.”

“Why so? I can’t see it.”

“For reasons that are personal to me,” replied Sholmes, with the
indifference that he frequently displayed toward his colleague.

The tramcar stopped at the rue de Château, which was the terminus. The
man descended and walked away quietly. Sholmes followed at so short a
distance that Ganimard protested, saying:

“If he should turn around he will suspect us.”

“He will not turn around.”

“How do you know?”

“He is an accomplice of Arsène Lupin, and the fact that he walks in
that manner, with his hands in his pockets, proves, in the first place,
that he knows he is being followed and, in the second place, that he is
not afraid.”

“But I think we are keeping too close to him.”

“Not too close to prevent his slipping through our fingers. He is too
sure of himself.”

“Ah! Look there! In front of that café there are two of the bicycle
police. If I summon them to our assistance, how can the man slip
through our fingers?”

“Well, our friend doesn’t seem to be worried about it. In fact, he is
asking for their assistance himself.”

“Mon Dieu!” exclaimed Ganimard, “he has a nerve.”

The man approached the two policemen just as they were mounting their
bicycles. After a few words with them he leaped on a third bicycle,
which was leaning against the wall of the café, and rode away at a fast
pace, accompanied by the two policemen.

“Hein! one, two, three and away!” growled Sholmes. “And through whose
agency, Monsieur Ganimard? Two of your colleagues.... Ah! but Arsène
Lupin has a wonderful organization! Bicycle policemen in his
service!... I told you our man was too calm, too sure of himself.”

“Well, then,” said Ganimard, quite vexed, “what are we to do now? It is
easy enough to laugh! Anyone can do that.”

“Come, come, don’t lose your temper! We will get our revenge. But, in
the meantime, we need reinforcements.”

“Folenfant is waiting for me at the end of the avenue de Neuilly.”

“Well, go and get him and join me later. I will follow our fugitive.”

Sholmes followed the bicycle tracks, which were plainly visible in the
dust of the road as two of the machines were furnished with striated
tires. Very soon he ascertained that the tracks were leading him to the
edge of the Seine, and that the three men had turned in the direction
taken by Bresson on the preceding evening. Thus he arrived at the
gateway where he and Ganimard had concealed themselves, and, a little
farther on, he discovered a mingling of the bicycle tracks which showed
that the men had halted at that spot. Directly opposite there was a
little point of land which projected into the river and, at the
extremity thereof, an old boat was moored.

It was there that Bresson had thrown away the package, or, rather, had
dropped it. Sholmes descended the bank and saw that the declivity was
not steep and the water quite shallow, so it would be quite easy to
recover the package, provided the three men had not forestalled him.

“No, that can’t be,” he thought, “they have not had time. A quarter of
an hour at the most. And yet, why did they come this way?”

A fisherman was seated on the old boat. Sholmes asked him:

“Did you see three men on bicycles a few minutes ago?”

The fisherman made a negative gesture. But Sholmes insisted:

“Three men who stopped on the road just on top of the bank?”

The fisherman rested his pole under his arm, took a memorandum book
from his pocket, wrote on one of the pages, tore it out, and handed it
to Sholmes. The Englishman gave a start of surprise. In the middle of
the paper which he held in his hand he saw the series of letters cut
from the alphabet-book:

CDEHNOPRZEO—237.

The man resumed his fishing, sheltered from the sun by a large straw
hat, with his coat and vest lying beside him. He was intently watching
the cork attached to his line as it floated on the surface of the
water.

There was a moment of silence—solemn and terrible.

“Is it he?” conjectured Sholmes, with an anxiety that was almost
pitiful. Then the truth burst upon him:

“It is he! It is he! No one else could remain there so calmly, without
the slightest display of anxiety, without the least fear of what might
happen. And who else would know the story of those mysterious letters?
Alice had warned him by means of her messenger.”

Suddenly the Englishman felt that his hand—that his own hand had
involuntarily seized the handle of his revolver, and that his eyes were
fixed on the man’s back, a little below the neck. One movement, and the
drama would be finished; the life of the strange adventurer would come
to a miserable end.

The fisherman did not stir.

Sholmes nervously toyed with his revolver, and experienced a wild
desire to fire it and end everything; but the horror of such an act was
repugnant to his nature. Death would be certain and would end all.

“Ah!” he thought, “let him get up and defend himself. If he doesn’t, so
much the worse for him. One second more ... and I fire....”

But a sound of footsteps behind him caused him to turn his head. It was
Ganimard coming with some assistants.

Then, quickly changing his plans, Sholmes leaped into the boat, which
was broken from its moorings by his sudden action; he pounced upon the
man and seized him around the body. They rolled to the bottom of the
boat together.

“Well, now!” exclaimed Lupin, struggling to free himself, “what does
this mean? When one of us has conquered the other, what good will it
do? You will not know what to do with me, nor I with you. We will
remain here like two idiots.”

The two oars slipped into the water. The boat drifted into the stream.

“Good Lord, what a fuss you make! A man of your age ought to know
better! You act like a child.”

Lupin succeeded in freeing himself from the grasp of the detective,
who, thoroughly exasperated and ready to kill, put his hand in his
pocket. He uttered an oath: Lupin had taken his revolver. Then he knelt
down and tried to capture one of the lost oars in order to regain the
shore, while Lupin was trying to capture the other oar in order to
drive the boat down the river.

“It’s gone! I can’t reach it,” said Lupin. “But it’s of no consequence.
If you get your oar I can prevent your using it. And you could do the
same to me. But, you see, that is the way in this world, we act without
any purpose or reason, as our efforts are in vain since Fate decides
everything. Now, don’t you see, Fate is on the side of his friend
Lupin. The game is mine! The current favors me!”

The boat was slowly drifting down the river.

“Look out!” cried Lupin, quickly.

Someone on the bank was pointing a revolver. Lupin stooped, a shot was
fired; it struck the water beyond the boat. Lupin burst into laughter.

“God bless me! It’s my friend Ganimard! But it was very wrong of you to
do that, Ganimard. You have no right to shoot except in self-defense.
Does poor Lupin worry you so much that you forget yourself?... Now, be
good, and don’t shoot again!... If you do you will hit our English
friend.”

He stood behind Sholmes, facing Ganimard, and said:

“Now, Ganimard, I am ready! Aim for his heart!... Higher!... A little
to the left.... Ah! you missed that time ... deuced bad shot.... Try
again.... Your hand shakes, Ganimard.... Now, once more ... one, two,
three, fire!... Missed!... Parbleu! the authorities furnish you with
toy-pistols.”

Lupin drew a long revolver and fired without taking aim. Ganimard put
his hand to his hat: the bullet had passed through it.

“What do you think of that, Ganimard! Ah! that’s a real revolver! A
genuine English bulldog. It belongs to my friend, Herlock Sholmes.”

And, with a laugh, he threw the revolver to the shore, where it landed
at Ganimard’s feet.

Sholmes could not withhold a smile of admiration. What a torrent of
youthful spirits! And how he seemed to enjoy himself! It appeared as if
the sensation of peril caused him a physical pleasure; and this
extraordinary man had no other purpose in life than to seek for dangers
simply for the amusement it afforded him in avoiding them.

Many people had now gathered on the banks of the river, and Ganimard
and his men followed the boat as it slowly floated down the stream.
Lupin’s capture was a mathematical certainty.

“Confess, old fellow,” said Lupin, turning to the Englishman, “that you
would not exchange your present position for all the gold in the
Transvaal! You are now in the first row of the orchestra chairs! But,
in the first place, we must have the prologue ... after which we can
leap, at one bound, to the fifth act of the drama, which will represent
the capture or escape of Arsène Lupin. Therefore, I am going to ask you
a plain question, to which I request a plain answer—a simple yes or no.
Will you renounce this affair? At present I can repair the damage you
have done; later it will be beyond my power. Is it a bargain?”

“No.”

Lupin’s face showed his disappointment and annoyance. He continued:

“I insist. More for your sake than my own, I insist, because I am
certain you will be the first to regret your intervention. For the last
time, yes or no?”

“No.”

Lupin stooped down, removed one of the boards in the bottom of the
boat, and, for some minutes, was engaged in a work the nature of which
Sholmes could not discern. Then he arose, seated himself beside the
Englishman, and said:

“I believe, monsieur, that we came to the river to-day for the same
purpose: to recover the object which Bresson threw away. For my part I
had invited a few friends to join me here, and I was on the point of
making an examination of the bed of the river when my friends announced
your approach. I confess that the news did not surprise me, as I have
been notified every hour concerning the progress of your investigation.
That was an easy matter. Whenever anything occurred in the rue Murillo
that might interest me, simply a ring on the telephone and I was
informed.”

He stopped. The board that he had displaced in the bottom of the boat
was rising and water was working into the boat all around it.

“The deuce! I didn’t know how to fix it. I was afraid this old boat
would leak. You are not afraid, monsieur?”

Sholmes shrugged his shoulders. Lupin continued:

“You will understand then, in those circumstances, and knowing in
advance that you would be more eager to seek a battle than I would be
to avoid it, I assure you I was not entirely displeased to enter into a
contest of which the issue is quite certain, since I hold all the trump
cards in my hand. And I desired that our meeting should be given the
widest publicity in order that your defeat may be universally known, so
that another Countess de Crozon or another Baron d’Imblevalle may not
be tempted to solicit your aid against me. Besides, my dear monsieur—”

He stopped again and, using his half-closed hands as a lorgnette, he
scanned the banks of the river.

“Mon Dieu! they have chartered a superb boat, a real war-vessel, and
see how they are rowing. In five minutes they will be along-side, and I
am lost. Monsieur Sholmes, a word of advice; you seize me, bind me and
deliver me to the officers of the law. Does that programme please
you?... Unless, in the meantime, we are shipwrecked, in which event we
can do nothing but prepare our wills. What do you think?”

They exchanged looks. Sholmes now understood Lupin’s scheme: he had
scuttled the boat. And the water was rising. It had reached the soles
of their boots. Then it covered their feet; but they did not move. It
was half-way to their knees. The Englishman took out his tobacco,
rolled a cigarette, and lighted it. Lupin continued to talk:

“But do not regard that offer as a confession of my weakness. I
surrender to you in a battle in which I can achieve a victory in order
to avoid a struggle upon a field not of my own choosing. In so doing I
recognize the fact that Sholmes is the only enemy I fear, and announce
my anxiety that Sholmes will not be diverted from my track. I take this
opportunity to tell you these things since fate has accorded me the
honor of a conversation with you. I have only one regret; it is that
our conversation should have occurred while we are taking a foot-bath
... a situation that is lacking in dignity, I must confess.... What did
I say? A foot-bath? It is worse than that.”

The water had reached the board on which they were sitting, and the
boat was gradually sinking.

Sholmes, smoking his cigarette, appeared to be calmly admiring the
scenery. For nothing in the world, while face to face with that man
who, while threatened by dangers, surrounded by a crowd, followed by a
posse of police, maintained his equanimity and good humor, for nothing
in the world would he, Sholmes, display the slightest sign of
nervousness.

Each of them looked as if he might say: Should a person be disturbed by
such trifles? Are not people drowned in a river every day? Is it such
an unusual event as to deserve special attention? One chatted, whilst
the other dreamed; both concealing their wounded pride beneath a mask
of indifference.

One minute more and the boat will sink. Lupin continued his chatter:

“The important thing to know is whether we will sink before or after
the arrival of the champions of the law. That is the main question. As
to our shipwreck, that is a foregone conclusion. Now, monsieur, the
hour has come in which we must make our wills. I give, devise and
bequeath all my property to Herlock Sholmes, a citizen of England, for
his own use and benefit. But, mon Dieu, how quickly the champions of
the law are approaching! Ah! the brave fellows! It is a pleasure to
watch them. Observe the precision of the oars! Ah! is it you, Brigadier
Folenfant? Bravo! The idea of a war-vessel is an excellent one. I
commend you to your superiors, Brigadier Folenfant.... Do you wish a
medal? You shall have it. And your comrade Dieuzy, where is he?... Ah!
yes, I think I see him on the left bank of the river at the head of a
hundred natives. So that, if I escape shipwreck, I shall be captured on
the left by Dieuzy and his natives, or, on the right, by Ganimard and
the populace of Neuilly. An embarrassing dilemma!”

The boat entered an eddy; it swung around and Sholmes caught hold of
the oarlocks. Lupin said to him:

“Monsieur, you should remove your coat. You will find it easier to swim
without a coat. No? You refuse? Then I shall put on my own.”

He donned his coat, buttoned it closely, the same as Sholmes, and said:

“What a discourteous man you are! And what a pity that you should be so
stubborn in this affair, in which, of course, you display your
strength, but, oh! so vainly! really, you mar your genius——”

“Monsieur Lupin,” interrupted Sholmes, emerging from his silence, “you
talk too much, and you frequently err through excess of confidence and
through your frivolity.”

“That is a severe reproach.”

“Thus, without knowing it, you furnished me, only a moment ago, with
the information I required.”

“What! you required some information and you didn’t tell me?”

“I had no occasion to ask you for it—you volunteered it. Within three
hours I can deliver the key of the mystery to Monsieur d’Imblevalle.
That is the only reply——”

He did not finish the sentence. The boat suddenly sank, taking both of
the men down with it. It emerged immediately, with its keel in the air.
Shouts were heard on either bank, succeeded by an anxious moment of
silence. Then the shouts were renewed: one of the shipwrecked party had
come to the surface.

It was Herlock Sholmes. He was an excellent swimmer, and struck out,
with powerful strokes, for Folenfant’s boat.

“Courage, Monsieur Sholmes,” shouted Folenfant; “we are here. Keep it
up ... we will get you ... a little more, Monsieur Sholmes ... catch
the rope.”

The Englishman seized the rope they had thrown to him. But, while they
were hauling him into the boat, he heard a voice behind him, saying:

“The key of the mystery, monsieur, yes, you shall have it. I am
astonished that you haven’t got it already. What then? What good will
it do you? By that time you will have lost the battle....”

Now comfortably installed astride the keel of the boat, Lupin continued
his speech with solemn gestures, as if he hoped to convince his
adversary.

“You must understand, my dear Sholmes, there is nothing to be done,
absolutely nothing. You find yourself in the deplorable position of a
gentleman——”

“Surrender, Lupin!” shouted Folenfant.

“You are an ill-bred fellow, Folenfant, to interrupt me in the middle
of a sentence. I was saying——”

“Surrender, Lupin!”

“Oh! parbleu! Brigadier Folenfant, a man surrenders only when he is in
danger. Surely, you do not pretend to say that I am in any danger.”

“For the last time, Lupin, I call on you to surrender.”

“Brigadier Folenfant, you have no intention of killing me; you may wish
to wound me since you are afraid I may escape. But if by chance the
wound prove mortal? Just think of your remorse! It would embitter your
old age.”

The shot was fired.

Lupin staggered, clutched at the keel of the boat for a moment, then
let go and disappeared.


It was exactly three o’clock when the foregoing events transpired.
Precisely at six o’clock, as he had foretold, Herlock Sholmes, dressed
in trousers that were too short and a coat that was too small, which he
had borrowed from an innkeeper at Neuilly, wearing a cap and a flannel
shirt, entered the boudoir in the Rue Murillo, after having sent word
to Monsieur and Madame d’Imblevalle that he desired an interview.

They found him walking up and down the room. And he looked so ludicrous
in his strange costume that they could scarcely suppress their mirth.
With pensive air and stooped shoulders, he walked like an automaton
from the window to the door and from the door to the window, taking
each time the same number of steps, and turning each time in the same
manner.

He stopped, picked up a small ornament, examined it mechanically, and
resumed his walk. At last, planting himself before them, he asked:

“Is Mademoiselle here?”

“Yes, she is in the garden with the children.”

“I wish Mademoiselle to be present at this interview.”

“Is it necessary——”

“Have a little patience, monsieur. From the facts I am going to present
to you, you will see the necessity for her presence here.”

“Very well. Suzanne, will you call her?”

Madame d’Imblevalle arose, went out, and returned almost immediately,
accompanied by Alice Demun. Mademoiselle, who was a trifle paler than
usual, remained standing, leaning against a table, and without even
asking why she had been called. Sholmes did not look at her, but,
suddenly turning toward Monsieur d’Imblevalle, he said, in a tone which
did not admit of a reply:

“After several days’ investigation, monsieur, I must repeat what I told
you when I first came here: the Jewish lamp was stolen by some one
living in the house.”

“The name of the guilty party?”

“I know it.”

“Your proof?”

“I have sufficient to establish that fact.”

“But we require more than that. We desire the restoration of the stolen
goods.”

“The Jewish lamp? It is in my possession.”

“The opal necklace? The snuff-box?”

“The opal necklace, the snuff-box, and all the goods stolen on the
second occasion are in my possession.”

Sholmes delighted in these dramatic dialogues, and it pleased him to
announce his victories in that curt manner. The baron and his wife were
amazed, and looked at Sholmes with a silent curiosity, which was the
highest praise.

He related to them, very minutely, what he had done during those three
days. He told of his discovery of the alphabet book, wrote upon a sheet
of paper the sentence formed by the missing letters, then related the
journey of Bresson to the bank of the river and the suicide of the
adventurer, and, finally, his struggle with Lupin, the shipwreck, and
the disappearance of Lupin. When he had finished, the baron said, in a
low voice:

“Now, you have told us everything except the name of the guilty party.
Whom do you accuse?”

“I accuse the person who cut the letters from the alphabet book, and
communicated with Arsène Lupin by means of those letters.”

“How do you know that such correspondence was carried on with Arsène
Lupin?”

“My information comes from Lupin himself.”

He produced a piece of paper that was wet and crumpled. It was the page
which Lupin had torn from his memorandum-book, and upon which he had
written the phrase.

“And you will notice,” said Sholmes, with satisfaction, “that he was
not obliged to give me that sheet of paper, and, in that way, disclose
his identity. Simple childishness on his part, and yet it gave me
exactly the information I desired.”

“What was it?” asked the baron. “I don’t understand.”

Sholmes took a pencil and made a fresh copy of the letters and figures.

“CDEHNOPRZEO—237.”

“Well?” said the baron; “it is the formula you showed me yourself.”

“No. If you had turned and returned that formula in every way, as I
have done, you would have seen at first glance that this formula is not
like the first one.”

“In what respect do they differ?”

“This one has two more letters—an E and an O.”

“Really; I hadn’t noticed that.”

“Join those two letters to the C and the H which remained after forming
the word ‘respondez,’ and you will agree with me that the only possible
word is ECHO.”

“What does that mean?”

“It refers to the _Echo de France_, Lupin’s newspaper, his official
organ, the one in which he publishes his communications. Reply in the
_Echo de France_, in the personal advertisements, under number 237.
That is the key to the mystery, and Arsène Lupin was kind enough to
furnish it to me. I went to the newspaper office.”

“What did you find there?”

“I found the entire story of the relations between Arsène Lupin and his
accomplice.”

Sholmes produced seven newspapers which he opened at the fourth page
and pointed to the following lines:

1. Ars. Lup. Lady implores protection. 540.

2. 540. Awaiting particulars. A.L.

3. A.L. Under domin. enemy. Lost.

4. 540. Write address. Will make investigation.

5. A.L. Murillo.

6. 540. Park three o’clock. Violets.

7. 237. Understand. Sat. Will be Sun. morn. park.

“And you call that the whole story!” exclaimed the baron.

“Yes, and if you will listen to me for a few minutes, I think I can
convince you. In the first place, a lady who signs herself 540 implores
the protection of Arsène Lupin, who replies by asking for particulars.
The lady replies that she is under the domination of an enemy—who is
Bresson, no doubt—and that she is lost if some one does not come to her
assistance. Lupin is suspicious and does not yet venture to appoint an
interview with the unknown woman, demands the address and proposes to
make an investigation. The lady hesitates for four days—look at the
dates—finally, under stress of circumstances and influenced by
Bresson’s threats, she gives the name of the street—Murillo. Next day,
Arsène Lupin announces that he will be in the Park Monceau at three
o’clock, and asks his unknown correspondent to wear a bouquet of
violets as a means of identification. Then there is a lapse of eight
days in the correspondence. Arsène Lupin and the lady do not require to
correspond through the newspaper now, as they see each other or write
directly. The scheme is arranged in this way: in order to satisfy
Bresson’s demands, the lady is to carry off the Jewish lamp. The date
is not yet fixed. The lady who, as a matter of prudence, corresponds by
means of letters cut out of a book, decides on Saturday and adds:
_Reply Echo 237_. Lupin replies that it is understood and that he will
be in the park on Sunday morning. Sunday morning, the theft takes
place.”

“Really, that is an excellent chain of circumstantial evidence and
every link is complete,” said the baron.

“The theft has taken place,” continued Sholmes. “The lady goes out on
Sunday morning, tells Lupin what she has done, and carries the Jewish
lamp to Bresson. Everything occurs then exactly as Lupin had foreseen.
The officers of the law, deceived by an open window, four holes in the
ground and two scratches on the balcony railing, immediately advance
the theory that the theft was committed by a burglar. The lady is
safe.”

“Yes, I confess the theory was a logical one,” said the baron. “But the
second theft—”

“The second theft was provoked by the first. The newspapers having
related how the Jewish lamp had disappeared, some one conceived the
idea of repeating the crime and carrying away what had been left. This
time, it was not a simulated theft, but a real one, a genuine burglary,
with ladders and other paraphernalia—”

“Lupin, of course—”

“No. Lupin does not act so stupidly. He doesn’t fire at people for
trifling reasons.”

“Then, who was it?”

“Bresson, no doubt, and unknown to the lady whom he had menaced. It was
Bresson who entered here; it was Bresson that I pursued; it was Bresson
who wounded poor Wilson.”

“Are you sure of it?”

“Absolutely. One of Bresson’s accomplices wrote to him yesterday,
before his suicide, a letter which proves that negotiations were
pending between this accomplice and Lupin for the restitution of all
the articles stolen from your house. Lupin demanded everything, ‘_the
first thing_ (that is, the Jewish lamp) _as well as those of the second
affair_.’ Moreover, he was watching Bresson. When the latter returned
from the river last night, one of Lupin’s men followed him as well as
we.”

“What was Bresson doing at the river?”

“Having been warned of the progress of my investigations——”

“Warned! by whom?”

“By the same lady, who justly feared that the discovery of the Jewish
lamp would lead to the discovery of her own adventure. Thereupon,
Bresson, having been warned, made into a package all the things that
could compromise him and threw them into a place where he thought he
could get them again when the danger was past. It was after his return,
tracked by Ganimard and myself, having, no doubt, other sins on his
conscience, that he lost his head and killed himself.”

“But what did the package contain?”

“The Jewish lamp and your other ornaments.”

“Then, they are not in your possession?”

“Immediately after Lupin’s disappearance, I profited by the bath he had
forced upon me, went to the spot selected by Bresson, where I found the
stolen articles wrapped in some soiled linen. They are there, on the
table.”

Without a word, the baron cut the cord, tore open the wet linen, picked
out the lamp, turned a screw in the foot, then divided the bowl of the
lamp which opened in two equal parts and there he found the golden
chimera, set with rubies and emeralds.

It was intact.


There was in that scene, so natural in appearance and which consisted
of a simple exposition of facts, something which rendered it
frightfully tragic—it was the formal, direct, irrefutable accusation
that Sholmes launched in each of his words against Mademoiselle. And it
was also the impressive silence of Alice Demun.

During that long, cruel accumulation of accusing circumstances heaped
one upon another, not a muscle of her face had moved, not a trace of
revolt or fear had marred the serenity of her limpid eyes. What were
her thoughts. And, especially, what was she going to say at the solemn
moment when it would become necessary for her to speak and defend
herself in order to break the chain of evidence that Herlock Sholmes
had so cleverly woven around her?

That moment had come, but the girl was silent.

“Speak! Speak!” cried Mon. d’Imblevalle.

She did not speak. So he insisted:

“One word will clear you. One word of denial, and I will believe you.”

That word, she would not utter.

The baron paced to and fro in his excitement; then, addressing Sholmes,
he said:

“No, monsieur, I cannot believe it, I do not believe it. There are
impossible crimes! and this is opposed to all I know and to all that I
have seen during the past year. No, I cannot believe it.”

He placed his hand on the Englishman’s shoulder, and said:

“But you yourself, monsieur, are you absolutely certain that you are
right?”

Sholmes hesitated, like a man on whom a sudden demand is made and
cannot frame an immediate reply. Then he smiled, and said:

“Only the person whom I accuse, by reason of her situation in your
house, could know that the Jewish lamp contained that magnificent
jewel.”

“I cannot believe it,” repeated the baron.

“Ask her.”

It was, really, the very thing he would not have done, blinded by the
confidence the girl had inspired in him. But he could no longer refrain
from doing it. He approached her and, looking into her eyes, said:

“Was it you, mademoiselle? Was it you who took the jewel? Was it you
who corresponded with Arsène Lupin and committed the theft?”

“It was I, monsieur,” she replied.

She did not drop her head. Her face displayed no sign of shame or fear.

“Is it possible?” murmured Mon. d’Imblevalle. “I would never have
believed it.... You are the last person in the world that I would have
suspected. How did you do it?”

“I did it exactly as Monsieur Sholmes has told it. On Saturday night I
came to the boudoir, took the lamp, and, in the morning I carried it
... to that man.”

“No,” said the baron; “what you pretend to have done is impossible.”

“Impossible—why?”

“Because, in the morning I found the door of the boudoir bolted.”

She blushed, and looked at Sholmes as if seeking his counsel. Sholmes
was astonished at her embarrassment. Had she nothing to say? Did the
confessions, which had corroborated the report that he, Sholmes, had
made concerning the theft of the Jewish lamp, merely serve to mask a
lie? Was she misleading them by a false confession?

The baron continued:

“That door was locked. I found the door exactly as I had left it the
night before. If you entered by that door, as you pretend, some one
must have opened it from the interior—that is to say, from the boudoir
or from our chamber. Now, there was no one inside these two rooms ...
there was no one except my wife and myself.”

Sholmes bowed his head and covered his face with his hands in order to
conceal his emotion. A sudden light had entered his mind, that startled
him and made him exceedingly uncomfortable. Everything was revealed to
him, like the sudden lifting of a fog from the morning landscape. He
was annoyed as well as ashamed, because his deductions were fallacious
and his entire theory was wrong.

Alice Demun was innocent!

Alice Demun was innocent. That proposition explained the embarrassment
he had experienced from the beginning in directing the terrible
accusation against that young girl. Now, he saw the truth; he knew it.
After a few seconds, he raised his head, and looked at Madame
d’Imblevalle as naturally as he could. She was pale—with that unusual
pallor which invades us in the relentless moments of our lives. Her
hands, which she endeavored to conceal, were trembling as if stricken
with palsy.

“One minute more,” thought Sholmes, “and she will betray herself.”

He placed himself between her and her husband in the desire to avert
the awful danger which, _through his fault_, now threatened that man
and woman. But, at sight of the baron, he was shocked to the very
centre of his soul. The same dreadful idea had entered the mind of
Monsieur d’Imblevalle. The same thought was at work in the brain of the
husband. He understood, also! He saw the truth!

In desperation, Alice Demun hurled herself against the implacable
truth, saying:

“You are right, monsieur. I made a mistake. I did not enter by this
door. I came through the garden and the vestibule ... by aid of a
ladder—”

It was a supreme effort of true devotion. But a useless effort! The
words rang false. The voice did not carry conviction, and the poor girl
no longer displayed those clear, fearless eyes and that natural air of
innocence which had served her so well. Now, she bowed her
head—vanquished.

The silence became painful. Madame d’Imblevalle was waiting for her
husband’s next move, overwhelmed with anxiety and fear. The baron
appeared to be struggling against the dreadful suspicion, as if he
would not submit to the overthrow of his happiness. Finally, he said to
his wife:

“Speak! Explain!”

“I have nothing to tell you,” she replied, in a very low voice, and
with features drawn by anguish.

“So, then ... Mademoiselle....”

“Mademoiselle saved me ... through devotion ... through affection ...
and accused herself....”

“Saved you from what? From whom?”

“From that man.”

“Bresson?”

“Yes; it was I whom he held in fear by threats.... I met him at one of
my friends’.... and I was foolish enough to listen to him. Oh! there
was nothing that you cannot pardon. But I wrote him two letters ...
letters which you will see.... I had to buy them back ... you know
how.... Oh! have pity on me?... I have suffered so much!”

“You! You! Suzanne!”

He raised his clenched fists, ready to strike her, ready to kill her.
But he dropped his arms, and murmured:

“You, Suzanne.... You!... Is it possible?”

By short detached sentences, she related the heartrending story, her
dreadful awakening to the infamy of the man, her remorse, her fear, and
she also told of Alice’s devotion; how the young girl divined the
sorrow of her mistress, wormed a confession out of her, wrote to Lupin,
and devised the scheme of the theft in order to save her from Bresson.

“You, Suzanne, you,” repeated Monsieur d’Imblevalle, bowed with grief
and shame.... “How could you?”


On the same evening, the steamer “City of London,” which plies between
Calais and Dover, was gliding slowly over the smooth sea. The night was
dark; the wind was fainter than a zephyr. The majority of the
passengers had retired to their cabins; but a few, more intrepid, were
promenading on the deck or sleeping in large rocking-chairs, wrapped in
their travelling-rugs. One could see, here and there, the light of a
cigar, and one could hear, mingled with the soft murmur of the breeze,
the faint sound of voices which were carefully subdued to harmonize
with the deep silence of the night.

One of the passengers, who had been pacing to and fro upon the deck,
stopped before a woman who was lying on a bench, scrutinized her, and,
when she moved a little, he said:

“I thought you were asleep, Mademoiselle Alice.”

“No, Monsieur Sholmes, I am not sleepy. I was thinking.”

“Of what? If I may be so bold as to inquire?”

“I was thinking of Madame d’Imblevalle. She must be very unhappy. Her
life is ruined.”

“Oh! no, no,” he replied quickly. “Her mistake was not a serious one.
Monsieur d’Imblevalle will forgive and forget it. Why, even before we
left, his manner toward her had softened.”

“Perhaps ... but he will remember it for a long time ... and she will
suffer a great deal.”

“You love her?”

“Very much. It was my love for her that gave me strength to smile when
I was trembling from fear, that gave me courage to look in your face
when I desired to hide from your sight.”

“And you are sorry to leave her?”

“Yes, very sorry. I have no relatives, no friends—but her.”

“You will have friends,” said the Englishman, who was affected by her
sorrow. “I have promised that. I have relatives ... and some influence.
I assure you that you will have no cause to regret coming to England.”

“That may be, monsieur, but Madame d’Imblevalle will not be there.”

Herlock Sholmes resumed his promenade upon the deck. After a few
minutes, he took a seat near his travelling companion, filled his pipe,
and struck four matches in a vain effort to light it. Then, as he had
no more matches, he arose and said to a gentleman who was sitting near
him:

“May I trouble you for a match?”

The gentleman opened a box of matches and struck one. The flame lighted
up his face. Sholmes recognized him—it was Arsène Lupin.

If the Englishman had not given an almost imperceptible movement of
surprise, Lupin would have supposed that his presence on board had been
known to Sholmes, so well did he control his feelings and so natural
was the easy manner in which he extended his hand to his adversary.

“How’s the good health, Monsieur Lupin?”

“Bravo!” exclaimed Lupin, who could not repress a cry of admiration at
the Englishman’s sang-froid.

“Bravo? and why?”

“Why? Because I appear before you like a ghost, only a few hours after
you saw me drowned in the Seine; and through pride—a quality that is
essentially English—you evince not the slightest surprise. You greet me
as a matter of course. Ah! I repeat: Bravo! Admirable!”

“There is nothing remarkable about it. From the manner in which you
fell from the boat, I knew very well that you fell voluntarily, and
that the bullet had not touched you.”

“And you went away without knowing what had become of me?”

“What had become of you? Why, I knew that. There were at least five
hundred people on the two banks of the river within a space of
half-a-mile. If you escaped death, your capture was certain.”

“And yet I am here.”

“Monsieur Lupin, there are two men in the world at whom I am never
astonished: in the first place, myself—and then, Arsène Lupin.”

The treaty of peace was concluded.

If Sholmes had not been successful in his contests with Arsène Lupin;
if Lupin remained the only enemy whose capture he must never hope to
accomplish; if, in the course of their struggles, he had not always
displayed a superiority, the Englishman had, none the less, by means of
his extraordinary intuition and tenacity, succeeded in recovering the
Jewish lamp as well as the blue diamond.

This time, perhaps, the finish had not been so brilliant, especially
from the standpoint of the public spectators, since Sholmes was
obliged to maintain a discreet silence in regard to the circumstances
in which the Jewish lamp had been recovered, and to announce that he
did not know the name of the thief. But as man to man, Arsène Lupin
against Herlock Sholmes, detective against burglar, there was neither
victor nor vanquished. Each of them had won corresponding victories.

Therefore they could now converse as courteous adversaries who had lain
down their arms and held each other in high regard.

At Sholmes’ request, Arsène Lupin related the strange story of his
escape.

“If I may dignify it by calling it an escape,” he said. “It was so
simple! My friends were watching for me, as I had asked them to meet me
there to recover the Jewish lamp. So, after remaining a good half-hour
under the overturned boat, I took advantage of an occasion when
Folenfant and his men were searching for my dead body along the bank of
the river, to climb on top of the boat. Then my friends simply picked
me up as they passed by in their motor-boat, and we sailed away under
the staring eyes of an astonished multitude, including Ganimard and
Folenfant.”

“Very good,” exclaimed Sholmes, “very neatly played. And now you have
some business in England?”

“Yes, some accounts to square up.... But I forgot ... what about
Monsieur d’Imblevalle?”

“He knows everything.”

“All! my dear Sholmes, what did I tell you? The wrong is now
irreparable. Would it not have been better to have allowed me to carry
out the affair in my own way? In a day or two more, I should have
recovered the stolen goods from Bresson, restored them to Monsieur
d’Imblevalle, and those two honest citizens would have lived together
in peace and happiness ever after. Instead of that—”

“Instead of that,” said Sholmes, sneeringly, “I have mixed the cards
and sown the seeds of discord in the bosom of a family that was under
your protection.”

“Mon Dieu! of course, I was protecting them. Must a person steal, cheat
and wrong all the time?”

“Then you do good, also?”

“When I have the time. Besides, I find it amusing. Now, for instance,
in our last adventure, I found it extremely diverting that I should be
the good genius seeking to help and save unfortunate mortals, while you
were the evil genius who dispensed only despair and tears.”

“Tears! Tears!” protested Sholmes.

“Certainly! The d’Imblevalle household is demolished, and Alice Demun
weeps.”

“She could not remain any longer. Ganimard would have discovered her
some day, and, through her, reached Madame d’Imblevalle.”

“Quite right, monsieur; but whose fault is it?”

Two men passed by. Sholmes said to Lupin, in a friendly tone:

“Do you know those gentlemen?”

“I thought I recognized one of them as the captain of the steamer.”

“And the other?”

“I don’t know.”

“It is Austin Gilett, who occupies in London a position similar to that
of Monsieur Dudouis in Paris.”

“Ah! how fortunate! Will you be so kind as to introduce me? Monsieur
Dudouis is one of my best friends, and I shall be delighted to say as
much of Monsieur Austin Gilett.”

The two gentlemen passed again.

“And if I should take you at your word, Monsieur Lupin?” said Sholmes,
rising, and seizing Lupin’s wrist with a hand of iron.

“Why do you grasp me so tightly, monsieur? I am quite willing to follow
you.”

In fact, he allowed himself to be dragged along without the least
resistance. The two gentlemen were disappearing from sight. Sholmes
quickened his pace. His finger-nails even sank into Lupin’s flesh.

“Come! Come!” he exclaimed, with a sort of feverish haste, in harmony
with his action. “Come! quicker than that.”

But he stopped suddenly. Alice Demun was following them.

“What are you doing, Mademoiselle? You need not come. You must not
come!”

It was Lupin who replied:

“You will notice, monsieur, that she is not coming of her own free
will. I am holding her wrist in the same tight grasp that you have on
mine.”

“Why?”

“Because I wish to present her also. Her part in the affair of the
Jewish lamp is much more important than mine. Accomplice of Arsène
Lupin, accomplice of Bresson, she has a right to tell her adventure
with the Baroness d’Imblevalle—which will deeply interest Monsieur
Gilett as an officer of the law. And by introducing her also, you will
have carried your gracious intervention to the very limit, my dear
Sholmes.”

The Englishman released his hold on his prisoner’s wrist. Lupin
liberated Mademoiselle.

They stood looking at each other for a few seconds, silently and
motionless. Then Sholmes returned to the bench and sat down, followed
by Lupin and the girl. After a long silence, Lupin said: “You see,
monsieur, whatever we may do, we will never be on the same side. You
are on one side of the fence; I am on the other. We can exchange
greetings, shake hands, converse a moment, but the fence is always
there. You will remain Herlock Sholmes, detective, and I, Arsène Lupin,
gentleman-burglar. And Herlock Sholmes will ever obey, more or less
spontaneously, with more or less propriety, his instinct as a
detective, which is to pursue the burglar and run him down, if
possible. And Arsène Lupin, in obedience to his burglarious instinct,
will always be occupied in avoiding the reach of the detective, and
making sport of the detective, if he can do it. And, this time, he can
do it. Ha-ha-ha!”

He burst into a loud laugh, cunning, cruel and odious.

Then, suddenly becoming serious, he addressed Alice Demun:

“You may be sure, mademoiselle, even when reduced to the last
extremity, I shall not betray you. Arsène Lupin never betrays
anyone—especially those whom he loves and admires. And, may I be
permitted to say, I love and admire the brave, dear woman you have
proved yourself to be.”

He took from his pocket a visiting card, tore it in two, gave one-half
of it to the girl, as he said, in a voice shaken with emotion:

“If Monsieur Sholmes’ plans for you do not succeed, mademoiselle, go to
Lady Strongborough—you can easily find her address—and give her that
half of the card, and, at the same time, say to her: _Faithful friend_.
Lady Strongborough will show you the true devotion of a sister.”

“Thank you,” said the girl; “I shall see her to-morrow.”

“And now, Monsieur Sholmes,” exclaimed Lupin, with the satisfied air of
a gentleman who has fulfilled his duty, “I will say good-night. We will
not land for an hour yet, so I will get that much rest.”

He lay down on the bench, with his hands beneath his head.

In a short time the high cliffs of the English coast loomed up in the
increasing light of a new-born day. The passengers emerged from the
cabins and crowded the deck, eagerly gazing on the approaching shore.
Austin Gilette passed by, accompanied by two men whom Sholmes
recognized as sleuths from Scotland Yard.

Lupin was asleep, on his bench.

THE END.


_The further startling, wonderful and thrilling adventures of “Arsène
Lupin” will be found in the book entitled “Arsène Lupin
Gentleman-Burglar”._




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARSÈNE LUPIN VS HERLOCK SHOLMES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


